










Coee Break Python


50 Workouts to Kickstart Your Rapid Code Understanding in Python

Christian Mayer


September 2018


A puzzle a day to learn, code, and play.














i















Contents




Contents	ii

1   Introduction	1

2   A Case for Puzzle-based Learning	4 2.1	Overcome the Knowledge Gap  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	5 2.2	Embrace the Eureka Moment	.  .  .  .  .  .  .	7 2.3	Divide and Conquer	.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	8 2.4	Improve From Immediate Feedback  .  .  .  .	9 2.5	Measure Your Skills .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    10 2.6	Individualized Learning .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    13 2.7	Small is Beautiful  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    14 2.8	Active Beats Passive Learning  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    16 2.9	Make Code a First-class Citizen  .  .  .  .  .  .    18 2.10  What You See is All There is	.  .  .  .  .  .  .    20

ii



CONTENTS	iii


3   The Elo Rating for Python	22 3.1	How to Use This Book  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    23 3.2	The Ideal Code Puzzle  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    25 3.3	How to Exploit the Power of Habits?   .  .  .    26 3.4	How to Test and Train Your Skills?  .  .  .  .    27 3.5	What Can This Book Do For You?   .  .  .  .    31

4   A Quick Overview of the Python Language 36 4.1	Keywords   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	37 4.2	Basic Data Types  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	40 4.3	Complex Data Types  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	43 4.4	Classes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	47 4.5	Functions and Tricks   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	50

5   Fifty Puzzles	54 5.1	Hello World  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    55 5.2	Variables & Float Division  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    57 5.3	Basic Arithmetic   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    59 5.4	Comments and Strings  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    61 5.5	Index and Concatenate Strings    .  .  .  .  .  .    64 5.6	List Indexing   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    67 5.7	Slicing in Strings   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    69 5.8	Integer Division  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    72 5.9	String Manipulation Operators    .  .  .  .  .  .    74 5.10  Implicit String Concatenation   .  .  .  .  .  .  .    76 5.11  Sum and Range Functions  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    78 5.12  Append Function for Lists  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    80 5.13  Overshoot Slicing  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    82



iv	CONTENTS


5.14  Modulo Operator  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	84 5.15  Branching  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	86 5.16  Negative Indices .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	89 5.17  The For Loop  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	91 5.18  Functions and Naming   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	94 5.19  Concatenating Slices   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	97 5.20  Arbitrary Arguments  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .	99 5.21  Indirect Recursion	.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  101 5.22  String Slicing   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  104 5.23  Slice Assignment   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  106 5.24  Default Arguments   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  108 5.25  Slicing and the len() Function   .  .  .  .  .  .  111 5.26  Nested Lists  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  113 5.27  Clearing Sublists   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  115 5.28  The Fibonacci Series   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  117 5.29  Continue and Modulo .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  120 5.30  Indexing and Range .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  122 5.31  Matrix Search  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  125 5.32  Max Prot .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  129 5.33  Bubble Sort Algorithm  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  132 5.34  Joining Strings   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  135 5.35  Arithmetic Calculations	.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  137 5.36  Binary Search  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  139 5.37  Modifying Lists in Loops  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  142 5.38  The Lambda Function   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  145 5.39  Multi-line and New-line .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  148 5.40  Escaping .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  150 5.41  Fibonacci   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  153



CONTENTS	v


5.42  Quicksort   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  156 5.43  Unpacking kwargs	.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  159 5.44  Innity .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  162 5.45  Graph Traversal .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  164 5.46  Lexicographical Sorting .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  168 5.47  Chaining of Set Operations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  170 5.48  Basic Set Operations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  173 5.49  Unicode Encryption .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  176 5.50  The Guess and Check Framework  .  .  .  .  .  179

6   Final Remarks	182













1

Introduction



The great code mastersKnuth, Torvalds, and Gates share one character trait:  the ambition to learn.  If you are reading this book, you are an aspiring coder and you seek ways to advance your coding skills. You already have some experience in writing code, but you feel that there is a lot to be learned before you become a master coder. You want to read and understand code better. You want to challenge the status quo that some of your peers un-derstand code faster than you.  Or you are already pro-cient with another programming language like Java or C++ but want to learn Python to become more valu-able to the market place.  Either way, you have already proven your ambition to learn and, therefore, this book is for you.  To join the league of the great code masters, you only have to do one thing: stay in the game.


1



2	CHAPTER 1.   INTRODUCTION


The  main  driver  for  mastery  is  neither  a  character trait,  nor  talent.	Mastery  comes  from  intense,  struc-tured training. The author Malcolm Gladwell formulated the famous rule of 10,000 hours after collecting research from various elds such as psychology and neurological science.1   The rule states that if you have average talent, you will reach mastery in any discipline by investing ap-proximately 10,000 hours of intense training. Bill Gates, the  founder  of  Microsoft,  reached  mastery  at  a  young age as a result of coding for more than 10,000 hours. He was committed and passionate about coding and worked long nights to develop his skills. He was anything but an overnight success.
There is one thing that will empower you  to invest the 10,000 hours of hard, focused work to reach mastery. What do you think it is?  As for the code masters, it’s your ambition to learn  that will drive you through the valleys of desperation on your path to mastery: complex code,  nasty  bugs,  and  project  managers  pushing  tight deadlines.  Nurturing your ambition to learn will pay a rich stream of dividends to you and your family as long as you live. It will make you a respectable member of the society providing unique value to information technology, automation, and digitalization.   Ultimately, it will give you strong condence. So keeping your ambition to learn intact is the one thing you must place above all else.

1Malcolm Gladwell Outliers:  The Story of Success



3


This book aims to be a stepping stone on your path to  becoming  a  Python  master.	It  helps  you  to  learn faster by making use of the established principles of good teaching.  It oers you ten to twenty hours of thorough Python training using one of the most ecient learning techniques,  called  practice  testing.   Investing  this  time will kickstart your skills to write, read, and understand Python source code.
The idea is that you solve code puzzles that start out simple but become more and more complex as you read the book.  In essence, you play Python interpreter and compute the output of a code snippet in your head. Then you check whether you were right with your guessusing feedback and explanationsto adapt and improve your coding skills over time.   To make this idea a reality,  I developed the online coding academy Finxter.com. The next section explains and motivates the advantages of the Finxter method of puzzle-based learning.













2

A Case for Puzzle-based Learning



Denition:   A  code  puzzle  is  an  educative snippet of source code that teaches a single computer  science  concept  by  activating  the learner’s curiosity and involving them in the learning process.


Before diving into practical puzzle solving, let us rst study 10 reasons why puzzle-based learning accelerates your learning speed and improves retention of the learned material.  There is robust evidence in psychological sci-ence for each of these reasons.  Yet, none of the existing coding  books  lift  code  puzzles  to  being  rst-class  citi-zens. Instead, they are mostly focused on one-directional teaching.  This book attempts to change that.  In brief, the 10 reasons for puzzle-based learning are the following.

4



2.1.   OVERCOME THE KNOWLEDGE GAP	5


1.  Overcome the Knowledge Gap (Section 2.1)

2.  Embrace the Eureka Moment (Section 2.2)

3.  Divide and Conquer (Section 2.3)

4.  Improve From Immediate Feedback (Section 2.4)

5.  Measure Your Skills (Section 2.5)

6.  Individualized Learning (Section 2.6)

7.  Small is Beautiful (Section 2.7)

8.  Active Beats Passive Learning (Section 2.8)

9.  Make Source Code a First-class Citizen (Section 2.9)

10.  What You See is All There is (Section 2.10)


2.1	 Overcome the Knowledge Gap

The great teacher Socrates delivered complex knowledge by asking a sequence of questions. Each question built on answers to previous questions provided by the student. This more than 2400 year old teaching technique is still in widespread use today. A good teacher opens a gap be-tween their knowledge and the learner’s. The knowledge gap makes the learner realize that they do not know the




CHAPTER 2. 6

A CASE FOR PUZZLE-BASED LEARNING


answer to a burning question.  This creates a tension in the learner’s mind.  To close this gap, the learner awaits the missing piece of knowledge from the teacher.  Better yet, the learner starts developing their own answers. The learner craves knowledge.
Code puzzles open an immediate knowledge gap. When looking  at  the  code,  you  rst  do  not  understand  the meaning of the puzzle.  The puzzle’s semantics are hid-den. But only you can transform the unsolved puzzle into a solved one. Look at this riddle: What pulls you down and never lets go?  Can you feel the tension?  Opening and closing a knowledge gap is a very powerful method for eective learning.1
Bad teachers open a knowledge gap that is too large. The  learner  feels  frustrated  because  they  cannot  over-come the gap.  Suppose you are standing before a river that you must cross. But you have not learned to swim, yet.  Now, consider two rivers.  The rst is the Colorado River that carved out the Grand Canyonquite a gap. The second is Rattlesnake Creek. The fact that you have never heard of this river indicates that it is not too big of an obstacle.   Most likely, you will not even attempt to swim through the big Colorado River.  But you could swim over the Rattlesnake if you stretch your abilities just a little bit.   You will focus, pep-talk yourself, and


1The answer is Gravity.



2.2.   EMBRACE THE EUREKA MOMENT	7


overcome the obstacle. As a result, your swimming skills and your condence will grow a little bit.
Puzzles  are  like  the  Rattlesnakethey  are  not  too great  a  challenge.	You  must  stretch  yourself  to  solve them, but you can do it, if you go all-out.
Constantly feeling a small but non-trivial knowledge gap creates a healthy learning environment. Stretch your limits, overcome the knowledge gap, and become better one puzzle at a time.


2.2	Embrace the Eureka Moment

Humans are unique because of their ability to learn. Fast and thorough learning has always increased our chances of survival. Thus, evolution created a brilliant biological reaction to reinforce learning in your body.  Your brain is wired to seek new information;  it is wired to always process data, to always learn.
Did you ever feel the sudden burst of happiness after experiencing a eureka moment?  Your brain releases en-dorphins, the moment you close a knowledge gap.  The instant gratication from learning is highly addictive, but this addiction makes you smarter. Solving a puzzle gives your brain instant gratication. Easy puzzles open small and hard puzzles open large knowledge gaps.  Overcome any of them and learn in the process.




CHAPTER 2. 8

A CASE FOR PUZZLE-BASED LEARNING

2.3	Divide and Conquer

Learning to code is a complex task.   You must learn a myriad  of  new  concepts  and  language  features.   Many aspiring coders are overwhelmed by the complexity. They seek a clear path to mastery.
People tend to prioritize specic activities with clearly dened goals.  If the path is not clear, we tend to drift away toward more specic paths.  Most aspiring coders think they have a goal:  becoming a better coder.  Yet, this is not a specic goal at all.   So what is a specic goal?  Watching Game of Thrones after dinner, Series 2 Episode 1 is as specic as it can be. Due to the specicity, watching Netix is more powerful than the fuzzy path of learning to code.  Hence, watching Netix wins most of the time.
As any productivity expert will tell you:  break a big task or goal into a series of smaller steps. Finishing each tiny  step  brings  you  one  step  closer  to  your  big  goal. Divide and conquer  makes you feel in control, pushing you one step closer toward mastery. You want to become a master coder?   Break the big coding skill into a list of sub-skillsunderstanding language features, designing algorithms, reading codeand then tackle each sub-skill one at a time.
Code puzzles do this for you. They break up the huge task of learning to code into a series of smaller learning



2.4.   IMPROVE FROM IMMEDIATE FEEDBACK	9


units.  The student experiences laser focus on one learn-ing task such as recursion, the for loop, or keyword ar-guments.   Don’t worry if you do not understand these concepts yetafter working through this book, you will. A good code puzzle delivers a single idea from the au-thor’s into the student’s head. You can digest one puzzle at a time. Each puzzle is a step toward your bigger goal of mastering computer science. Keep solving puzzles and you keep improving your skills.


2.4	 Improve From Immediate Feedback

As a child, you learned to walk by trial and errortry, receive feedback, adapt, and repeat.  Unconsciously, you will minimize negative and maximize positive feedback. You avoid falling because it hurts, and you seek the ap-proval of your parents. But not only organic life benets from the great learning technique of trial and error.  In machine learning, algorithms learn by guessing an output and  adapting  their  guesses  based  on  their  correctness. To learn anything, you need feedback such that you can adapt your actions.
However, an excellent learning environment provides you not only with feedback but with immediate feedback for your actions. In contrast, poor learning environments




CHAPTER 2. 10

A CASE FOR PUZZLE-BASED LEARNING


do not provide any feedback at all or only with a large delay. Examples are activities with good short-term and bad long-term eects such as smoking, alcohol, or damag-ing the environment. People cannot control these activi-ties because of the delayed feedback. If you were to slap your friend each time he lights a cigarettea not overly drastic measure to safe his lifehe would quickly stop smoking.  If you want to learn fast, make sure that your environment provides immediate feedback.   Your brain will nd rules and patterns to maximize the reinforce-ment from the immediate feedback.
This book oers you an environment with immediate feedback to make learning to code easy and fast.  Over time, your brain will absorb the meaning of a code snip-pet quicker and with higher precision this way. Learning this skill pushes you toward the top 10% of all coders. There are other environments with immediate feedback, like executing code and checking correctness, but puzzle-based learning is the most direct one:  Each puzzle edu-cates with immediate feedback.


2.5	Measure Your Skills

You  need  to  have  a  denite  goal  to  be  successful.   A denite goal is a powerful motivator and pushes you to stretch your skills constantly. The more denite and con-crete it is, the stronger it becomes.   Holding a denite



2.5.   MEASURE YOUR SKILLS	11


goal in your mind is the rst and foremost step toward its physical manifestation.  Your beliefs bring your goal into reality.
Think about an experienced Python programmer you know, e.g., your nerdy colleague or class mate. How good are their Python skills compared to yours?   On a scale from your grandmother to Bill Gates, where is your col-league and where are you?  These questions are dicult to answer because there is no simple way to measure the skill level of a programmer. This creates a severe problem for your learning progress:  the concept of being a good programmer becomes fuzzy and diluted. What you can’t measure, you can’t improve.  Not being able to measure your coding skills diverts your focus from systematic im-provement. Your goal becomes less denite.
So what should be your denite goal when learning a programming language?  To answer this, let us travel briey to the world of chess, which happens to provide an excellent learning environment for aspiring players.  Ev-ery player has an Elo rating number that measures their skill level.  You get an Elo rating when playing against other playersif you win, your Elo rating increases. Vic-tories against stronger players lead to a higher increase of the Elo rating.  Every ambitious chess player simply focuses on one thing:  increasing their Elo rating.   The ones  that  manage  to  push  their  Elo  rating  very  high, earn grand master titles. They become respected among




CHAPTER 2. 12

A CASE FOR PUZZLE-BASED LEARNING


chess players and in the outside world.
Every chess player dreams of being a grandmaster. The goal is as denite as it can be:  reaching an Elo of 2400 and master level (see Section 3).  Thus, chess is a great learning environmentevery player is always aware of their skill level.  A player can measure how decisions and habits impact their Elo number.  Do they improve when sleeping enough before important games?   When training opening variants?  When solving chess puzzles? What you can measure, you can improve.
The main idea of this book, and the associated learn-ing app Finxter.com, is to transfer this method of mea-suring skills from the chess world to programming. Sup-pose  you  want  to  learn  Python.   The  Finxter  website assigns you a rating number that measures your coding skills. Every Python puzzle has a rating number as well, according to its diculty level. You ‘play’ against a puz-zle at your diculty level: The puzzle and you will have more or less the same Elo rating so that you can enjoy personalized learning.  If you solve the puzzle, your Elo increases and the puzzle’s Elo decreases. Otherwise, your Elo decreases and the puzzle’s Elo increases.  Hence, the Elo ratings of the dicult puzzles increase over time. But only learners with high Elo ratings will see them.  This self-organizing system ensures that you are always chal-lenged but not overwhelmed, while you constantly receive feedback about how good your skills are in comparison



2.6.   INDIVIDUALIZED LEARNING	13


with others.  You always know exactly where you stand on your path to mastery.


2.6	Individualized Learning

The educational system today is built around the idea of classes and courses.   In these environments,  all stu-dents consume the same learning material from the same teacher applying the same teaching methods.  This tra-ditional  idea  of  classes  and  courses  has  a  strong  foun-dation in our culture and social thinking patterns.  Yet, science proves again and again the value of individual-ized learning. Individualized learning tailors the content, pace, style, and technology of teaching to the student’s skills and interests. Of course, truly individualized learn-ing has always required a lot of teachers.  But paying a high number of teachers is expensive (at least in the short term) in a non-digital environment.
In the digital era,  many fundamental limitations of our society begin to crack.  Compute servers and intel-ligent machines can provide individualized learning with ease.  But with changing limitations, we must adapt our thinking as well.  Machines will enable truly individual-ized learning very soon; yet society needs time to adapt to this trend.
Puzzle-based learning is a perfect example of auto-




CHAPTER 2. 14

A CASE FOR PUZZLE-BASED LEARNING


mated, individualized learning. The ideal puzzle stretches the  student’s  abilities  and  is  neither  boring  nor  over-whelming. Finding the perfect learning material for each learner is an important and challenging problem.  Finx-ter uses a simple but eective solution to solve this prob-lem:  the Elo rating system.  The student solves puzzles at their individual skill level.  This book and the book’s web backend Finxter pushes teaching toward individual-ized learning.


2.7	Small is Beautiful

The 21st century has seen a rise in microcontent.   Mi-crocontent is a short and accessible piece of valuable in-formation such as the weather forecast, a news headline, or a cat video.   Social media giants like Facebook and Twitter oer a stream of never-ending microcontent. Mi-crocontent is powerful because it satises the desire for shallow entertainment. Microcontent has many benets: the consumer stays engaged and interested, and it is eas-ily digestible in a short time. Each piece of microcontent pushes your knowledge horizon a bit further. Today, mil-lions of people are addicted to microcontent.
However, this addiction will also become a problem to these millions. The computer science professor Cal New-port shows in his book Deep Work  that modern society values deep work more than shallow work. Deep work is



2.7.   SMALL IS BEAUTIFUL	15


a high-value activity that needs intense focus and skill. Examples of deep work are programming, writing, or re-searching.   Contrarily,  shallow  work  is  every  low-value activity  that  can  be  done  by  everybody  (e.g.,  posting the cat videos to social media).   The demand for deep work grew with the rise of the information society;  at the same time, the supply stayed constant or decreased, e.g., because of the addictiveness of shallow social me-dia. People that see and understand this trend can ben-et tremendously.  In a free market, the prices of scarce and demanded resources rise.  Because of this, surgeons, lawyers, and software developers earn $100,000 per year and more.  Their work cannot easily be replaced or out-sourced to unskilled workers.  If you are able to do deep work, to focus your attention on a challenging problem, society pays you generously.
What  if we  could  marry the  concepts  of microcon-tent and deep work? This is the promise of puzzle-based learning. Finxter oers a stream of self-contained micro-content in the form of hundreds of small code puzzles. But instead of just being unrelated microcontent, each puzzle is a tiny stimulus that teaches a coding concept or language feature. Hence, each puzzle pushes your knowl-edge in the same direction.
Puzzle-based learning breaks the bold goal, i.e., reach the mastery level in Python, into tiny actionable steps: solve and understand one code puzzle per day.   While




CHAPTER 2. 16

A CASE FOR PUZZLE-BASED LEARNING


solving the smaller tasks, you progress toward your larger goal. You take one step at a time to eventually reach the mastery level. A clear path to success.


2.8	Active Beats Passive Learning

Robust scientic evidence shows that active learning dou-bles students’ learning performance.  In a study on that matter,  test  scores  of  active  learners  improve  by  more than one grade compared to their passive learning fellow students.2     Not using active learning techniques wastes your time and hinders you in reaching your full potential in any area of life. Switching to active learning is a sim-ple tweak that will instantly improve your performance when learning any subject.
How does active learning work?  Active learning re-quires the student to interact with the material, rather than  simply  consuming  it.	It  is  student-  rather  than teacher-centric. Great active learning techniques are ask-ing and answering questions, self-testing, teaching, and summarizing. A popular study shows that one of the best learning techniques is practice testing.3    In this learning technique, you test your knowledge even if you have not

2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_learning# Research_evidence
3http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/ 1529100612453266



2.8.   ACTIVE BEATS PASSIVE LEARNING	17


learned everything yet.  Rather than learning by doing, it’s learning by testing.
However,  the  study  argues  that  students  must  feel safe during these tests. Therefore, the tests must be low-stake,  i.e.,  students have little to lose.   After the test, students get feedback about the correctness of the tests. The study shows that practice testing boosts long-term retention of the material by almost a factor of 10.  As it turns out, solving a daily code puzzle is not just another learning techniqueit is one of the best.
Although active learning is twice as eective,  most books focus on passive learning.  The author delivers in-formation; the student passively consumes the informa-tion.  Some programming books include active learning elements by adding tests or by asking the reader to try out the code examples. Yet, I always found this imprac-ticable while reading on the train, on the bus, or in bed. But if these active elements drop out, learning becomes 100% passive again.
Fixing this mismatch between research and common practice drove me to write this book about puzzle-based learning.   In contrast to other books,  this book makes active learning a rst-class citizen.  Solving code puzzles is an inherent active learning technique.  You must de-velop the solution yourself, in every single puzzle.  The teacher is as much in the background as possiblethey




CHAPTER 2. 18

A CASE FOR PUZZLE-BASED LEARNING


only explain the correct solution if you couldn’t work it out yourself. But before telling you the correct solution, your knowledge gap is already ripped wide open.  Thus, you are mentally ready to digest new material.
To drive this point home, let me emphasize this ar-gument again:  puzzle-based learning is a variant of the active learning technique named practice testing.  Prac-tice testing is scientically proven to teach you more in less time.


2.9	 Make Code a First-class Citizen

Each grandmaster of chess has spent tens of thousands of hours looking into a near innite number of chess posi-tions. Over time, they develop a powerful skill: the intu-ition of the expert. When presented with a new position, they are able to name a small number of strong candidate moves within seconds.   They operate on a higher level than normal people.  For normal people, the position of a single chess piece is one chunk of information.  Hence they can only memorize the position of about six chess pieces. But chess grand masters view a whole position or a sequence of moves as a single chunk of information. The extensive training and experience has burned strong pat-terns into their biological neural networks.  Their brain



2.9.   MAKE CODE A FIRST-CLASS CITIZEN	19


is able to hold much more informationa result of the good learning environment they have put themselves in.
What are some principles of good learning?   Let us dive into another example of a great learning environment this time for machines. Recently, Google’s articial intel-ligence AlphaZero has proven to be the best chess playing entity in the world. AlphaZero uses articial neural net-works. An articial neural network is the digital twin of the human brain with articial neurons and synapses. It learns by example much like a grandmaster of chess.  It presents itself a position, predicts a move, and adapts its prediction to the extent the prediction was incorrect.
Chess and machine learning exemplify principles of good  learning  that  are  valid  in  any  eld  you  want  to master. First, transform the object to learn into a stim-ulus  that  you  present  to  yourself  over  and  over  again. In chess, study as many chess positions as you can.  In math, make reading mathematical papers with theorems and proofs a habit.  In coding, expose yourself to lots of code. Second, seek feedback. Immediate feedback is bet-ter than delayed feedback. However, delayed feedback is still much better than no feedback at all.   Third,  take your time to learn and understand thoroughly. Although it is possible to learn on-the-go, you will cut corners. The person who prepares beforehand always has an edge.  In the world of coding, some people recommend learning by coding practical projects and doing nothing more. Chess




CHAPTER 2. 20

A CASE FOR PUZZLE-BASED LEARNING


grandmasters, sports stars, and intelligent machines do not follow this advice. They learn by practicing isolated stimuli again and again until they have mastered them. Then they move on to more complex stimuli.
Puzzle-based learning is code-centric.   You will nd yourself staring at the code for a long time until the in-sight strikes.   This creates new synapses in your brain that  help  you  understand,  write,  and  read  code  fast. Placing  code  in  the  center  of  the  whole  learning  pro-cess creates an environment in which you will develop the powerful intuition of the expert. Maximize the learn-ing time you spend looking at code rather than at other stimuli.


2.10	What You See is All There is

My professor of theoretical computer science used to tell us that if we only stare long enough at a proof, the mean-ing will transfer into our brains by osmosis. This fosters deep thinking, a state of mind where learning is more pro-ductive.  In my experience, his staring method works but  only  if  the  proof  contains  everything  you  need  to know to solve it. It must be self-contained.
A good code puzzle beyond the most basic level is self-contained.  You can solve it purely by staring at it until your mind follows your eyesyour mind develops



2.10.   WHAT YOU SEE IS ALL THERE IS	21


a solution based on rational thinking.  There is no need to look things up.  If you are a great programmer, you will nd the solution quickly.   If not, it will take more time but you can still nd the solutionit is just more challenging.
My  gold  standard  was  to  design  each  puzzle  such that it is mostly self-contained.  However, to deliver on the book’s promise of training your understanding of the Python  basics,  puzzles  must  introduce  syntactical  lan-guage  elements  as  well.	But  even  if  the  syntax  in  a puzzle challenges you, you should still develop your own solutions based on your imperfect knowledge. This prob-abilistic thinking opens the knowledge gap and prepares your brain to receive and digest the explained solution. After all, your goal is long-term retention of the material.













3

The Elo Rating for Python



Pick any sport you always loved to do.   How good are you compared to others?   The Elo rating answers this question with surprising accuracy.  It assigns a number to each player that represents their skill in the sport. The higher the Elo number, the better the player.
Let us give a small example of how the Elo rating works in chess. Alice is a strong player with an Elo rating of 2000 while Bob is an intermediate player with Elo 1500. Say Alice and Bob play a chess game against each other. Who will win the game? As Alice is the stronger player, she should win the game. The Elo rating system rewards players for good and punishes for bad results: the better the result,  the higher the reward.   For Bob,  a win,  or even a draw, would be a very good outcome of the game. For Alice, the only satisfying result is a win.   Winning


22



3.1.   HOW TO USE THIS BOOK	23


against a weaker player is less rewarding than winning against a stronger player.  Thus, the Elo rating system rewards Alice with only +3 Elo points for a win.  A loss costs her -37 Elo points, and even a draw costs her -17 points.  Playing against a weaker player is risky for her because she has much to lose but little to win.
The idea of Finxter is to view your learning as a series of games between two players: you and the Python puz-zle.  Both players have an Elo rating.  Your rating mea-sures your current skills and the puzzle’s rating reects the  diculty.   On  our  website  finxter.com,  a  puzzle plays against hundreds of Finxter users.  Over time, the puzzle’s Elo rating converges to its true diculty level.
Table 3.1 shows the ranks for each Elo rating level. The  table  is  an  opportunity  for  you  to  estimate  your Python skill level.  In the following, I describe how you can use this book to test your Python skills.


3.1	How to Use This Book

This book provides a series of 50 code puzzles plus expla-nations to test and train your Python skills. The puzzles start from beginner level and become gradually harder to reach intermediate level.  A follow-up book covers in-termediate to expert level. This book is perfect for users between the beginner and the intermediate level.   Yet,



24  CHAPTER 3.   THE ELO RATING FOR PYTHON







Elo rating
2500 2400-2500 2300-2400 2200-2300 2100-2200 2000-2100 1900-2000 1800-1900 1700-1800 1600-1700 1500-1600 1400-1500 1300-1400 1200-1300 1100-1200 1000-1100
0-1000

Rank
World Class Grandmaster International Master Master
National Master Master Candidate Authority Professional Expert
Experienced Intermediate Intermediate Experienced Learner Learner Scholar Autodidact Beginner
Basic Knowledge


Table 3.1: Elo ratings and skill levels.



3.2.   THE IDEAL CODE PUZZLE	25


even expert users can improve their speed of code un-derstanding. No matter your current skill level, you will benet from puzzle-based learning.   It will deepen and accelerate your understanding of basic coding patterns.


3.2	The Ideal Code Puzzle

The ideal code puzzle possesses each of the following six properties. The puzzle


1.  has a surprising result;

2.  provides new information;

3.  is relevant and practical;

4.  delivers one main idea;

5.  can be solved by thinking alone; and

6.  is challenging but not overwhelming.


This was the gold standard for all the puzzles created in this book. I did my best to adhere to this standard.



26  CHAPTER 3.   THE ELO RATING FOR PYTHON

3.3	 How to Exploit the Power of Habits?

You are what you repeatedly do. Your habits determine your success in life and in any specic area such as cod-ing.   Creating  a  powerful  learning  habit  can  take  you a  long  way  on  your  journey  to  becoming  a  code  mas-ter.  Charles Duhigg, a leading expert in the psychology of habits, shows that each habit follows a simple process called the habit loop. This process consists of three steps: trigger, routine, and reward.1  First, the trigger starts the process. A trigger can be anything such as drinking your morning coee. Second, the routine is an action you take when presented with the trigger.  An example routine is to solve a code puzzle.   Each routine is in anticipation of a reward.  Third, the reward is anything that makes you  feel  good.   When  you  overcome  a  knowledge  gap, your brain releases endorphinsa powerful reward. Over time, your habit becomes strongeryou seek the reward.
Habits with strong manifestations in these three steps are  life-changing.	Invest  10%  of  your  paycheck  every month and you will be rich one day.   Get used to the habit of solving one Python puzzle a day as you drink your morning coeeand enjoy the endorphin dose in your brain.  Implementing this Finxter loop in your day

1Charles Duhigg, The Power of Habit:  Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business.



3.4.   HOW TO TEST AND TRAIN YOUR SKILLS?27


sets up an automatic progress toward you becoming a better and better coder. As soon as you have established the Finxter loop as a strong habit, it will cost you neither a lot of time, nor energy.  This is self-engineering at its nest level.


3.4	 How to Test and Train Your Skills?

I  recommend  solving  at  least  one  or  two  code  puzzles every day, e.g., as you drink your morning coee.  Then you spend the rest of your learning time on real projects that  matter  to  you.   The  puzzles  guarantee  that  your skills improve over time and the real project brings you results.
If you want to test your Python skills, use the follow-ing simple method.


1.  Track your individual Elo rating as you read the book and solve the code puzzles. Simply write your current Elo rating into the book. Start with an ini-tial rating of 1000 if you are a beginner,  1500 if you are an intermediate, and 2000 if you are an ad-vanced Python programmer.  Of course, if you al-ready have an online rating on finxter.com, start-ing with this rating would be the most precise op-



28  CHAPTER 3.   THE ELO RATING FOR PYTHON


tion.   Figure 3.4 shows ve dierent examples of how  your  Elo  will  change  while  working  through the book. Two factors impact the nal rating: how you select your initial rating and how good you per-form (the latter being more important).

2.  If your solution is correct, add the Elo points ac-cording to the table given with the puzzle.  Other-wise, subtract the given Elo points from your cur-rent Elo number.

Solve the puzzles in a sequential manner because they build upon each other.  Advanced readers can also solve puzzles in the sequence they wishthe Elo rating will work as well.  The Elo rating will become more accurate as you solve more and more puzzles.  Although only an estimate, your Elo rating is an objective measure to com-pare your skills with the skills of others. Several Finxter users have reported that the rating is surprisingly accu-rate.
Use the following training plan to develop a strong learning habit with puzzle-based learning.

1.  Select  a  daily  trigger  after  which  you  solve  code puzzles for 10 minutes. For example, decide on your Coee Break Python, or even solve code puzzles as you brush your teeth or sit on the train to work, university, or school.



3.4.   HOW TO TEST AND TRAIN YOUR SKILLS?29





Grand master 2500

2000

1500
Your Elo

1000

500


Beginner, 50% correct
0	Intermediate, 50% correct
Advanced, 50% correct

Beginner, 0% correct
Advanced, 100% correct


0      10      20      30      40      50 Number of Solved Puzzles


Figure  3.1:   This  plot  exemplies  how  your  Elo  rating may change while you work through the 50 code puzzles. There are three important observations. First, no matter how you select your initial Elo, you will converge to your true skill level as you solve more puzzles.   Second, you will lose Elo points faster when you have a higher Elo number. Third, your nal Elo will be anywhere between 200 and 2450 after working through this book.



30  CHAPTER 3.   THE ELO RATING FOR PYTHON


2.  Scan over the puzzle in a rst quick pass and ask yourself: what is the unique idea of this puzzle?

3.  Dive deeply into the code.  Try to understand the purpose of each symbol, even if it seems trivial at rst.  Avoid being shallow and lazy.  Instead, solve each  puzzle  thoroughly  and  take  your  time.   It’s counterintuitive:  To learn faster in less time, you must stay calm and take your time and allow your-self to dig deep. There is no shortcut.

4.  Make sure you carry a pen with you and write your solution into the book.  This ensures that you stay objectivewe  all  have  the  tendency  to  fake  our-selves. Active learning is a central idea of this book.

5.  Look up the solution and read the explanation with care. Do you understand every aspect of the code? Write open questions down and look them up later, or send them to me (info@finxter.com). I will do everything I can to come up with a good explana-tion.

6.  Only if your solution was 100% correctincluding whitespaces, data types, and formatting of the output you get Elo points for this puzzle.  Otherwise you should count it as a wrong solution and swallow the negative Elo points. The reason for this strict rule



3.5.   WHAT CAN THIS BOOK DO FOR YOU?	31


is that this is the best way to train yourself to solve the puzzles thoroughly.


As you follow this simple training plan, your skill to see through source code quickly will improve.  Over the long haul, this will have a huge impact on your career, income, and work satisfaction. You do not have to invest much time because the training plan requires only 10 20 minutes per day.  But you must be persistent in your training eort.   If you get o track,  get right back on track the next day.  When you run out of code puzzles, feel free to checkout Finxter.com with more than 300 hand-crafted code puzzles.  I regularly publish new code puzzles on the website as well.


3.5	 What Can This Book Do For You?

Before we dive into puzzle solving, let me anticipate and address possible misconceptions about this book.
The puzzles are too easy/too hard.  This book is for you if you already have some experience in coding. Your skill level in the Python programming language ranges from beginner to intermediate.   Even so, if you are al-ready an advanced coder, this book is for you as wellif you  read  it  in  a  dierent  way.   Measure  the  time  you



32  CHAPTER 3.   THE ELO RATING FOR PYTHON


need to solve the puzzles and limit your solution time to  only  1020  seconds.   This  introduces  an  additional challenge for solving the puzzles: time pressure.  Solving puzzles  under  time  pressure  sharpens  your  rapid  code understanding skills even more. Eventually, you will feel that your coding intuition has improved.  If the puzzles are too hard, great.  Your knowledge gap must be open before you can eectively absorb information.  Just take your time to thoroughly understand every bit of new in-formation. Study the cheat sheets in Chapter 4 properly.
This  book  is  not  conventionally  structured  by  topic. Correct,  the  puzzles  are  sorted  by  Elo  and  not  struc-tured by topic. Puzzles with a small Elo rating are easier and more fundamental.   Puzzles with a higher Elo rat-ing are harder.  To solve them, you need to combine the fundamental learnings from the easier puzzles. Ordering puzzles by diculty has many advantages. You can solve puzzles in your skill level. As you are getting better, the puzzles  become  harder.   Finally,  ordering  by  complex-ity allows us to combine many topics in a single puzzle. For example, a Python one-liner may use two topics: list comprehension and lambda functions.
Learning to code is best done via coding on projects. This is only part of the truth. Yes, you can improve your skills to a certain level by diving into practical projects. But as in every other discipline, your skills will bounce quickly against your personal ceiling. Your ceiling is the



3.5.   WHAT CAN THIS BOOK DO FOR YOU?	33


maximum  skill  level  you  are  able  to  reach,  given  your current limitations.  These limitations come from a lack of thorough understanding of basic knowledge. You can-not understand higher-level knowledge properly without understanding the basic building blocks.  Have you ever used machine learning techniques in your work? Without theoretical foundations, you are doomed. Theory pushes your ceiling upwards and gets rid of the limitations that hold you back.
Abraham Lincoln said:  Give me six hours to chop down a tree and I will spend the rst four sharpening the axe.  Do not fool yourself into the belief that just doing it is the most eective road to reach any goal. You must constantly sharpen the saw to be successful in any disci-pline. Learning to code is best done via practical coding and  investing time into your personal growth.  Millions of  computer  scientists  enjoyed  an  academic  education. They  know  that  solving  hundreds  or  thousands  of  toy examples  in  their  studies  built  a  strong  and  thorough foundation.
How  am  I  supposed  to  solve  this  puzzle  if  I  do  not know the meaning of this specic Python language fea-ture?  Guess it!  Python is an intuitive language.  Think about potential meanings.  Solve the puzzle for each of thema  good  exercise  for  your  brain.   The  more  you work on the puzzle, even with imperfect knowledge, the better you prepare your brain to absorb the puzzle’s ex-



34  CHAPTER 3.   THE ELO RATING FOR PYTHON


planation.
Why should I buy the book when puzzles are available for free at Finxter.com?  My goal is to remove barriers to learning Python.   Thus, all puzzles are available for free online.  This book is based on the puzzles available at Finxter, but it extends them with more detailed and structured information.   Nevertheless,  if you don’t like reading books, feel free to check out the website.
Anyway,  why  do  some  people  thrive  in  their  elds and become valued experts while others stagnate? They read books in their eld.   They increase their value to the marketplace by feeding themselves with valuable in-formation.  Over time, they have a huge advantage over their peers. They get the opportunities to develop them-selves even further. They enjoy their jobs and have much higher work satisfaction and life quality. Belonging to the top ten percent in your eld yields hundreds of thousands of dollars during your career. However, there is price you have to pay to unlock the gates to this world:  you have to invest in books and your own personal development. The more time and money you spend on books, the more valuable you become to the marketplace!
The Elo-based rating is not accurate. Several nxters nd the rating helpful, fair, and accurate in comparison to  others.   It  provides  a  good  indication  of  where  one stands in the eld of Python coders. If you feel the rating



3.5.   WHAT CAN THIS BOOK DO FOR YOU?	35


is not accurate, ask yourself whether you are objective. If you think you are, please let me know so that I have a chance to improve this book and the Finxter back-end.













4

A Quick Overview of the Python Language



Before diving into the puzzles, work through the follow-ing ve cheat sheets.  They contain 80% of the Python language features in 20% of the time.  So they are de-nitely worth your time investment.
Learn them thoroughly. Try to understand every sin-gle line of code. And catapult your skills to the next level. Most Python coders neglect to invest enough time into a thorough and comprehensive understanding of the ba-sics such as language features, data types, and language tricks.  Be dierent and absorb the examples in each of the cheat sheets. Open up your path to become a master coder and join the top ten percent of coders.
You  can  download  all  ve  cheat  sheets  as  concise


36



4.1.   KEYWORDS	37


PDFs and post them to your wall until you know them by heart (https://blog.finxter.com/python-cheat-sheet/).


4.1	Keywords

All programming languages reserve certain words to have a  special  meaning.	These  words  are  called  keywords. With keywords, the programmer can issue commands to the compiler or interpreter.  They let you tell the com-puter what to do. Without keywords, the computer could not make sense from the seemingly random text in your code le. Note that as keywords are reserved words, you cannot use them as variable names.
The most important Python keywords are the follow-ing.


False	True not	break def	if for	while
None	lambda

and	or continue	class elif	else in	is return


The next cheat sheet introduces the most important keywords in Python.  In each row, you can nd the key-word itself,  a short description,  and an example of its usage.




CHAPTER 4. 38

A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THE PYTHON LANGUAGE




Keyword
False,
True

Description
Data values from the data type Boolean

Code example
False == (1 > 2)
True == (2 > 1)

and, or,Logical operators:	x, y = True, False not	(x and y) → both x and y  (x or y) == True
must be True	# True
(x sore y) → either x or y	(x and y) == False
mu t b  True
# True
(not x) → x must be false
(not y) == True # True
break   Ends loop prematurely	while(True):
break # no infinite loop print("hello world")

continueFinishes current loop iteration


while(True): continue
print("43") # dead code



class   Defines a new class → a real-world concept (object oriented programming)


class Beer:

def __init__(self):

def	Defines a new function or	self.content = 1.0
cplaarsasmmeteetrhosde.lFforploaitntetrs, tfoirst	def drink(self):
the class object. When	self.content = 0.0
calling class method, first
parameter is implicit.	# constructor creates class becks = Beer()




if,	Conditional program elif,   execution: program starts

# empty beer bottle becks.drink()
x = int(input("your val: "))
if x > 3: print("Big")



4.1.   KEYWORDS	39



else	with “if” branch, tries “elif” branches, and finishes with “else” branch (until one evaluates to True).
for,	# For loop while   declaration
for i in [0,1,2]: print(i)


in	Checks whether element is in sequence
is	Checks whether both elements point to the same object

None	Empty value constant


lambda  Function with no name (anonymous)


elif x == 3: print("Medium") else: print("Small")


# While loop - same semantics
j = 0
while j < 3: print(j) j = j + 1
42 in [2, 39, 42] # True

y = x = 3
x is y # True
[3] is [3] # False
def f(): x = 2
f() is None # True
(lambda x: x + 3)(3) #
returns 6

return  Terminates function	def incrementor(x): execution and passes the               return x + 1
eAxnecoupttiioonnafllovwaltuoe tahfetecratlhleer.   incrementor(4) # returns 5
return keyword specifies the result.




CHAPTER 4. 40

A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THE PYTHON LANGUAGE

4.2	Basic Data Types

Many programmers know basic data types as primitive data types. They provide the primitives on which higher-level concepts are built.   A house is built from bricks. Likewise, a complex data type is built from basic data types.   I  introduce  basic  data  types  in  the  next  cheat sheet and complex data types in Section 4.3.
Specically, the next cheat sheet explains the three most important (classes of) basic data types in Python. First, the boolean  data type encodes truth values.   For example,  the expression 42 > 3 evaluates to True and 1 2 f2;4;6g evaluates to False.  Second, the numerical types integer, oat, and complex numbers encode integer values, oating point values, and complex values, respec-tively. For example, 41 is an integer value, 41:99 is a oat value, and 41:999+0:1i is a complex value (the rst part of the equation being the real number and the second the imaginary number). Third, the string data type encodes textual data. An example of a string value is the Shake-speare quote ‘Give  every  man  thy  ear,  but  few  thy voice’.



4.2.   BASIC DATA TYPES	41




Data Type + Description
Boolean
The Boolean data type is a truth value, either True or False.

These are important Boolean operators ordered by priority (from highest to lowest): not x →
“if x is False, then x, else y”

x and y →
“if x is False, then x, else y”

x or y →
“if x is False, then y, else x”
Integer
An integer is a positive or negative number without floating point (e.g. 3).

Example
x, y = True, False print(x and not y) # True
print(not x and y or x) # True

## All of those evaluate to False if (None or 0 or 0.0 or '' or []
or {} or set()): print("Dead code")

## All of those evaluate to True if (1 < 2 and 3 > 2 and 2 >=2
and 1 == 1 and 1 != 0): print("True")

## Arithmetic Operations x, y = 3, 2
print(x + y) # = 5
print(x - y) # = 1

Float	print(x * y) # = 6
A float is a positive or	print(x / y) # = 1.5 negative number with floating  print(x // y) # = 1 point precision (e.g.	print(x % y) # = 1s
3.14159265359).	print(-x) # = -3


The ‘//’ operator performs integer division. The result is an integer value that is rounded towards the smaller integer number (e.g. 3 // 2 == 1).

print(abs(-x)) # = 3 print(int(3.9)) # = 3 print(float(3)) # = 3.0
print(x ** y) # = 9




CHAPTER 4. 42

A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THE PYTHON LANGUAGE



String
Python Strings are sequences of characters. They are immutable which means that you can not alter the characters without creating a new string.

The four main ways to create strings are the following.

1. Single quotes 'Yes'
2. Double quotes "Yes"
3. Triple quotes (multi-line) """Yes
We Can"""
4. String method
str(5) == '5' # True 5. Concatenation
"Ma" + "hatma" # 'Mahatma'

These are whitespace characters in strings. ● Newline     \n ● Space         \s
● Tab	\t


## Indexing & Slicing
s = "The youngest pope was 11 years old"
print(s[0])	# 'T' print(s[1:3])	# 'he' print(s[-3:-1])   # 'ol' print(s[-3:])	# 'old'
x = s.split() # string array print(x[-3] + " " + x[-1] + " " + x[2] + "s") # '11 old popes'

## Key String Methods
y = "  This is lazy\t\n" print(y.strip()) # 'This is lazy' print("DrDre".lower()) # 'drdre' print("stop".upper()) # 'STOP'
s = "smartphone" print(s.startswith("smart")) # True print(s.endswith("phone")) # True print("another".find("other")) # 2 print("cheat".replace("ch", "m"))
# 'meat'
print(','.join(["F", "B", "I"])) # 'F,B,I'
print(len("Rumpelstiltskin")) # 15
print("ear" in "earth") # True



4.3.   COMPLEX DATA TYPES	43

4.3	Complex Data Types

In  the  previous  section,  you  learned  about  basic  data types.   These are the building blocks for complex  data types.  Think of complex data types as containerseach holding a multitude of (potentially dierent) data types.
Specically, the complex data types in this cheat sheet are lists, sets, and dictionaries.  A list is an ordered se-quence of data values (that can be either basic or complex data types). An example for such an ordered sequence is the list of all US presidents: [’Washington’,  ’Adams’, ’Jefferson’,  ...,  ’Obama’,  ’Trump’].   In contrast, a set is an unordered sequence of data values: {  ’Trump’, ’Washington’,  ’Jefferson’,  ...,  ’Obama’}.
Expressing the US presidents as a set loses all order-ing informationit’s not a sequence anymore.  But sets do have an advantage over lists.  Retrieving information about particular data values in the set is much faster. For instance, checking whether the string ’Obama’ is in the set of US presidents is blazingly fast even for large sets. I provide the most important methods and ideas in the following cheat sheet.




CHAPTER 4. 44

A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THE PYTHON LANGUAGE



Complex Data Type + Description
List
A container data type

Example

l = [1, 2, 2]
print(len(l)) # 3

that stores a sequence of elements. Unlike strings,

lists are mutable: modification possible.
Adding elements
to a list with append, insert, or list concatenation. The append operation is fastest.
Removing elements is slower (find it first).
Reversing
the order of elements.
Sorting a list
Slow for large lists: O(n log n), n list elements.



[1, 2, 2].append(4) # [1, 2, 2, 4] [1, 2, 4].insert(2,2) # [1, 2, 2, 4] [1, 2, 2] + [4] # [1, 2, 2, 4]



[1, 2, 2, 4].remove(1) # [2, 2, 4]

[1, 2, 3].reverse() # [3, 2, 1]

[2, 4, 2].sort() # [2, 2, 4]

Indexing	[2, 2, 4].index(2)
Finds index of the first	# index of element 4 is "0" occurence of an element   [2, 2, 4].index(2,1)
in the list. Is slow when
traversing the whole list.  # index of el. 2 after pos 1 is "1"

Stack
Python lists can be used intuitively as stack via the two list operations append() and pop().
Set


stack = [3] stack.append(42) # [3, 42]
stack.pop() # 42 (stack: [3]) stack.pop() # 3 (stack: [])

basket = {'apple', 'eggs',
'banana', 'orange'}



4.3.   COMPLEX DATA TYPES	45



Unordered collection of unique elements
(at-most-once).

Dictionary
A useful data structure for storing (key, value) pairs.


same = set(['apple', 'eggs', 'banana', 'orange'])
print(basket == same) # True

calories = {'apple' : 52, 'banana' : 89,
'choco' : 546}

Reading and writing	c = calories
Read and write elements  print(c['apple'] < c['choco']) # True
by specifying the key	c['cappu'] = 74
within the brackets. Use   print(c['banana'] < c['cappu']) # False
the keys() and values()
functions to access all	print('apple' in c.keys()) # True
keys and values of the	print(52 in c.values()) # True dictionary.
Dictionary Looping	for k, v in calories.items(): You can access the (key,          print(k) if v > 500 else None
value) pairs of a	# 'chocolate'
dictionary with the items() method.
Membership operator	basket = {'apple', 'eggs', Check with the keyword                         'banana', 'orange'}
in whether the set, list,   print('eggs' in basket} # True
or dictionary contains an  print('mushroom' in basket} # False
element. Set
containment is faster than list containment.

List and Set Comprehension
List comprehension is the concise Python way to create lists. Use brackets plus an expression, followed by a for clause. Close with


## List comprehension
[('Hi ' + x) for x in ['Alice', 'Bob', 'Pete']]
# ['Hi Alice', 'Hi Bob', 'Hi Pete'] [x * y for x in range(3) for y in range(3) if x>y]
# [0, 0, 2]




CHAPTER 4. 46

A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THE PYTHON LANGUAGE



zero or more for or if clauses.

Set comprehension is similar to list comprehension.


## Set comprehension
squares = { x**2 for x in [0,2,4] if x
< 4 } # {0, 4}



4.4.   CLASSES	47

4.4	Classes

Object-oriented programming  is an inuential, powerful, and expressive programming abstraction.  The program-mer thinks in terms of classes and objects.  A class is a blueprint for an object. An object contains specic data and provides the functionality specied in the class.
Say, you are programming a game to let you build, simulate,  and grow cities.   In object-oriented program-ming,  you  represent  all  things  (buildings,  persons,  or cars) as objects. For example, each building object stores data  such  as  name,  size,  and  price  tag.   Additionally, each  building  provides  a  dened  functionality  such  as calculate_monthly_earnings().  This simplies read-ing and understanding your code for other programmers. Even more important, you can now easily divide responsi-bilities. You code the buildings and your colleague codes the moving cars.
In short, object-oriented programming helps you to write readable code. By learning object orientation, your skill of collaborating with others on complex problems improves. The next cheat sheet introduces the most basic concepts.




CHAPTER 4. 48

A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THE PYTHON LANGUAGE



4.4.   CLASSES	49




CHAPTER 4. 50

A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THE PYTHON LANGUAGE

4.5	Functions and Tricks

Python is full of extra tricks and special functionality. Learning these tricks makes you more ecient and pro-ductive.   But more importantly, these tricks make pro-gramming easy and fun.  In the next cheat sheet, I give you the most important ones.



4.5.   FUNCTIONS AND TRICKS	51


ADVANCED FUNCTIONS

map(func, iter)
Executes the function on all elements of the iterable. Example: list(map(lambda x: x[0], ['red', 'green', 'blue']))
# Result: ['r', 'g', 'b']

map(func, i1, ..., ik)
Executes the function on all k elements of the k iterables. Example: list(map(lambda x, y: str(x) + ' ' + y + 's' , [0, 2, 2], ['apple', 'orange', 'banana']))
# Result: ['0 apples', '2 oranges', '2 bananas']

string.join(iter)
Concatenates iterable elements separated by string. Example: ' marries '.join(list(['Alice', 'Bob']))
# Result: 'Alice marries Bob'

filter(func, iterable)
Filters out elements in iterable for which function returns False (or 0). Example: list(filter(lambda x: True if x>17 else False, [1, 15, 17, 18])) # Result: [18]
string.strip()
Removes leading and trailing whitespaces of string. Example: print("\n   \t  42  \t ".strip()) # Result: 42
sorted(iter)
Sorts iterable in ascending order. Example:
sorted([8, 3, 2, 42, 5]) # Result: [2, 3, 5, 8, 42]

sorted(iter, key=key)
Sorts according to the key function in ascending order. Example: sorted([8, 3, 2, 42, 5], key=lambda x: 0 if x==42 else x) # [42, 2, 3, 5, 8]
help(func)
Returns documentation of func. Example:




CHAPTER 4. 52

A QUICK OVERVIEW OF THE PYTHON LANGUAGE


help(str.upper()) # Result: '... to uppercase.'

zip(i1, i2, ...)
Groups the i-th elements of iterators i1, i2, … together. Example: list(zip(['Alice', 'Anna'], ['Bob', 'Jon', 'Frank'])) # Result: [('Alice', 'Bob'), ('Anna', 'Jon')]
Unzip
Equal to: 1) unpack the zipped list, 2) zip the result. Example: list(zip(*[('Alice', 'Bob'), ('Anna', 'Jon')] # Result: [('Alice', 'Anna'), ('Bob', 'Jon')]
enumerate(iter)
Assigns a counter value to each element of the iterable. Example: list(enumerate(['Alice', 'Bob', 'Jon']))
# Result: [(0, 'Alice'), (1, 'Bob'), (2, 'Jon')]

TRICKS
python -m http.server <P>
Want to share files between your PC and your phone? Run this command in your PC’s shell. <P> is any port number between 0–65535. Type < IP address of PC>:<P> in the phone’s browser. Now, you can browse the files in the PC’s directory.
Read comic
import antigravity
Opens the comic series xkcd in your web browser

Zen of Python import this
'...Beautiful is better than ugly. Explicit is ...'

Swapping variables
This is a breeze in Python. No offense, Java! Example:
a, b = 'Jane', 'Alice' a, b = b, a
# Result: a = 'Alice', b = 'Jane'



4.5.   FUNCTIONS AND TRICKS	53


Unpacking arguments
Use a sequence as function arguments via asterisk operator *. Use a dictionary (key, value) via double asterisk operator **. Example:
def f(x, y, z): return x + y * z
f(*[1, 3, 4]) # 13
f(**{'z' : 4, 'x' : 1, 'y' : 3}) # 13

Extended Unpacking
Use unpacking for multiple assignment feature in Python. Example:
a, *b = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
# Result: a = 1, b = [2, 3, 4, 5]

Merge two dictionaries
Use unpacking to merge two dictionaries into a single one. Example:
x={'Alice' : 18}
y={'Bob' : 27, 'Ann' : 22} z = {**x,**y}
# Result: z = {'Alice': 18, 'Bob': 27, 'Ann': 22}













5

Fifty Code Puzzles



In  the  previous  chapters,  we  have  seen  the  benets  of puzzle-based learning.  Moreover, we have revisited the most important Python keywords, data structures, tips, and tricks.   Now take your pen, ll your cup of coee, and let’s dive into the 50 code puzzles in the book.  The puzzles are very basic in the beginning but will become harder and harder as you proceed with the book. Again, take your time and try to understand each and every line until you move on to the next puzzle.










54



5.1.   HELLO WORLD	55

5.1	Hello World


Puzzle 1

############################# ##  id  321
##  Puzzle  Elo  527
##  Correctly  solved  86  % #############################


print(’hello  world’)


What is the output of this code?
Code must communicate with the outside world to have any impact.  If there is no interface, it is not worth executing the codethe precious CPU power would be better spent on crypto mining.
Via the print function, you connect your program to the outside world.  This function, as the name indicates, prints a value to the standard output.
What is the standard output?   You can think of it as the environment in which your Python program lives. Your standard output is the air around you. If you shout Ouch!, every person in your environment can read from your standard output that you just experienced pain.
The data that is printed to the standard output is



56	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


of type string.  A string is a sequence of characters and is dened via each of the three following ways:  via the single quote (’), double quote ("), or triple quote (’’’ and """). In the puzzle, we use the single quote to dene our string ’hello  world’.
Again, start with an initial rating of 1000 if you are a beginner, 1500 if you are an intermediate, and 2000 if you are an advanced Python programmer.   If your solution was correct, add the respective Elo dierence from the table to your current Elo number. Otherwise, subtract it from your current Elo number.

The correct solution 

hello  world

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 41 16 8 8 8

Incorrect -14 -39 -47 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.2.   VARIABLES & FLOAT DIVISION	57

5.2	Variables & Float Division


Puzzle 2

############################# ##  id  315
##  Puzzle  Elo  625
##  Correctly  solved  91  % #############################


x  =  55  /  11 print(x)


What is the output of this code?
The  majority  of  people  solve  this  puzzle  correctly. The puzzle has two goals. First, it introduces the concept of variables.  Python evaluates the result of the expres-sion on the right side of the equation and stores it in the variable x.  After dening the variable, you can access it at any point in the program code.
Second, it forces you to read code carefully by means of an interesting twist: Division always returns a oating point number. Thus, variable x stores the oat value 5.0. The print function outputs the result as a oat and not as an integer value 5. This is the source of most errors in the code. People focus too much on what they mean (se-mantics) and too little on how they say it (syntax). But



58	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


computers are not good yet at interpreting the meaning of people. We have to talk to them in their language. So you get zero points for this puzzle if your solution was the integer value 5.

The correct solution 

5.0

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 43 21 9 8 8

Incorrect -12 -34 -46 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.3.   BASIC ARITHMETIC	59

5.3	Basic Arithmetic Operations





Puzzle 3

############################# ##  id  314
##  Puzzle  Elo  666
##  Correctly  solved  75  % #############################


x  =  50  *  2  +  (60  -  20)  /  4 print(x)


What is the output of this code?
The  Python  interpreter  is  a  powerful  tool.   In  this puzzle,  it acts as a simple calculator.   It takes a basic mathematical expression and calculates the result.
The syntax of expressions is straightforward: use the operators +;   ; and = exactly as you have learned them in school. The Python interpreter will handle basic rules such as multiplication before addition for you.
Note that a common mistake here is that people write the result as an integer instead of a oat.  This can lead to bugs in the code that are hard to nd.



60	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


The correct solution 

110.0

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 44 23 9 8 8

Incorrect -11 -32 -46 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.4.   COMMENTS AND STRINGS	61

5.4	Comments and Strings



Puzzle 4

############################# ##  id  313
##  Puzzle  Elo  691
##  Correctly  solved  78  % #############################


#  This  is  a  comment answer  =  42	#  the  answer

#  Now  back  to  the  puzzle
text  =  "#  Is  this  a  comment?" print(text)


What is the output of this code?
This puzzle introduces two basic concepts. First, vari-ables can hold strings.   In fact, variables can hold any data type.  The interpreter determines the data type of a variable at runtime.  The data type of a variable can change: you can assign a string to a variable, followed by an integer. Second, comments in the code start with the hash character # and end with the start of the next line. Comments are important to improve the readability of your code.



62	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


The small twist in this puzzle is the question whether the hash character within the string literal starts a new comment.  This is not the casea comment cannot ap-pear within a string.
There are two types of comments:  block comments and inline comments.  Block comments are indented to the same level as the commented code. Inline comments are separated by at least two spaces on the same line as the commented code.
The Python standard recommends to write comments as complete sentences.  Moreover, the standard discour-ages the use of inline comments because inline comments are often unnecessary and clutter the code.
Note that according to the standard, the second com-ment  in  the  puzzle  is  considered  as  bad  style.	Write short and conside code and do not overuse comments. Be aware, a friend of mine working at Google told me that he got critized for commenting obvious statements during the coding interview.





The correct solution 


#  Is  this  a  comment?



5.4.   COMMENTS AND STRINGS	63


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 45 24 9 8 8

Incorrect -10 -31 -46 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



64	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.5	 Index and Concatenate Strings


Puzzle 5

############################# ##  id  331
##  Puzzle  Elo  742
##  Correctly  solved  63  % #############################


x  =  ’silent’
print(x[2]  +  x[1]  +  x[0]
+  x[5]  +  x[3]  +  x[4])


What is the output of this code?
This puzzle introduces a powerful tool for your Python toolbox: indexing. Make sure you feel comfortable using it because many advanced puzzles build on your proper understanding of indexing.
In Python, you can access every character in the string by using an integer value that denes the position of the character  in  the  string.   We  call  this  integer  value  an index.
If the string has six characters as in the example, the indices of these characters are as follows.



5.5.   INDEX AND CONCATENATE STRINGS	65


String s:    s     i     l     e    n    t Index:      0    1    2    3    4    5




You can index any character using the square bracket notation [] with their respective position values.  Many programming novices are confused by the fact that the rst element in a sequence has index 0.  Therefore, you access the rst character ’s’ with the expression s[0] and the third character ’l’ with the expression s[2].
The plus operator + is context sensitive. It calculates the mathematical sum for two given numerical values but appends strings for two given string values. For example, the expression ’a’  +  ’b’ returns a new string ’ab’.
With this information, you are now able to determine how string s is reordered using indexing notation and the ‘+’ operator for strings.
A small note in case you were confused.  There is no separate character type in Python; a character is a string of size one.



The correct solution 

listen



66	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 45 27 10 8 8

Incorrect -10 -28 -45 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.6.   LIST INDEXING	67

5.6	List Indexing


Puzzle 6

############################# ##  id  337
##  Puzzle  Elo  745
##  Correctly  solved  91  % #############################


squares  =  [1,  4,  9,  16,  25] print(squares[0])


What is the output of this code?
This puzzle introduces the simple but powerful list data structure in Python.  You have to search very hard to nd an algorithm that doesn’t use a list. Many famous algorithms such as quicksort are based only on a single list as their core data structure.
Wikipedia denes a list as an abstract data type that represents a countable number of ordered values.  1   The data type is abstract because you can use lists indepen-dently of the concrete data type(s) of the list elements.
The Python way of handling lists and list access is

1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_(abstract_data_ type)



68	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


simple and clean. Create a list by writing comma-separated values between the opening and closing square brackets.
In the Java programming language, you must use re-dundant natural language function calls such as get(i) to access a list value.   In Python,  this is much easier. You access the i-th element in a list lst with the intu-itive bracket notation lst[i]. This notation is consistent for all compound data types such as strings and arrays.
This leads to small and repeated time savings during programming. The time savings of millions of developers add up to a strong collective argument for Python.

The correct solution 

1

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 45 27 10 8 8

Incorrect -10 -28 -45 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.7.   SLICING IN STRINGS	69

5.7	Slicing in Strings


Puzzle 7

############################# ##  id  336
##  Puzzle  Elo  778
##  Correctly  solved  72  % #############################


word  =  "galaxy" print(len(word[1:]))


What is the output of this code?
More than one out of four Finxter users cannot solve this puzzle.   There are two concepts that are novel for them: the len() function and slicing.
The len() function is a handy tool to get the length of built-in Python data types such as strings, lists, dic-tionaries, or tuples.  Learn it now and make your future life easier.
Slicing  is  a  Python-specic  concept  for  accessing  a range of values in sequence types such as lists or strings. It is one of the most popular Python features.   Under-standing slicing is one of the key requirements for un-derstanding most existing Python code bases.  In other



70	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


words, the time you invest now in mastering slicing will be repaid a hundredfold during your career.
The idea of slicing is simple.  Use the bracket nota-tion to access a sequence  of elements instead of only a single  element.   You  do  this  via  the  colon  notation  of [start:end].  This notation denes the start index (in-cluded) and the end index (excluded). Note that forget-ting that the end index is always excluded in sequence operators is a very common source of bugs.
For the sake of completeness, let me quickly explain the advanced slicing notation [start:end:step].   The only dierence to the previous notation is that it allows you to specify the step size as well.   For example,  the command ’python’[:5:2] returns every second charac-ter up to the fourth character, i.e., the string ’pto’.










The correct solution 



5



5.7.   SLICING IN STRINGS	71


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 46 29 10 8 8

Incorrect -9 -26 -45 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



72	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.8	Integer Division


Puzzle 8

############################# ##  id  316
##  Puzzle  Elo  781
##  Correctly  solved  69  % #############################


x  =  50  //  11 print(x)


What is the output of this code?
When I started to learn Python 3, I used to be con-fused about the semantics of dividing two integers.   Is the result a oat or an integer value? The reason for my confusion was a nasty Java bug that I once found in my code.  The code was supposed to perform a simple divi-sion of two integers and return a oat parameter value between zero and one.   But Java uses integer division, i.e., it skips the remainder.  Thus, the value was always either zero or one, but took never a value in-between. It took me days to gure that out.
Save yourself the debugging time by memorizing the following  rule  once  and  for  all.   The  //  operator  per-forms integer (oor) division and the / operator performs



5.8.   INTEGER DIVISION	73


oat (true) division.  An example for oor division is 50 //  11  =  4.  An example for true division is 50  /  11  = 4.545454545454546.
Note that oor division always rounds down, i.e., 3 //  2  ==  1 and -3  //  2  ==  -2.
Although the puzzle seems simple, more than twenty percent of the Finxter users cannot solve it.

The correct solution 

4

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 46 29 10 8 8

Incorrect -9 -26 -45 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



74	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.9	 String Manipulation Operators

Puzzle 9

############################# ##  id  327
##  Puzzle  Elo  786
##  Correctly  solved  60  % #############################


print(3  *  ’un’  +  ’ium’)


What is the output of this code?
Python  has  powerful  built-in  capabilities  for  string manipulation.  Web companies like Google love Python because it is a perfect t for the text-based World Wide Web. The puzzle explains two basic string manipulation operators. The + operator concatenates two strings. The * operator concatenates a string to itself repeatedly. The standard arithmetic rules apply to these operators: mul-tiplication rst, then addition.


The correct solution 

unununium



5.9.   STRING MANIPULATION OPERATORS	75


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 46 30 10 8 8

Incorrect -9 -25 -45 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



76	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.10	 Implicit String Concatenation


Puzzle 10

############################# ##  id  328
##  Puzzle  Elo  794
##  Correctly  solved  74  % #############################


x  =  ’py’  ’thon’ print(x)


What is the output of this code?
A well-designed puzzle conveys one single point that surprises the reader.  This puzzle introduces a language feature that surprised me when I rst saw it. The Python interpreter automatically concatenates two strings that are next to each other. Think about all the pluses + you could save!
Just kidding:  forget this trick immediately.  Code is read much more often than it is written and these tricks will confuse some readers of your code.  My editor even recommended skipping this puzzle because it may be con-fusing.  Although he is totally right, I still keep it in the



5.10.   IMPLICIT STRING CONCATENATION	77


book because I think you may nd it interestingand because you may also want to understand other people’s dirty code.

The correct solution 

python

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 46 30 10 8 8

Incorrect -9 -25 -45 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



78	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.11	Sum and Range Functions



Puzzle 11

############################# ##  id  93
##  Puzzle  Elo  815
##  Correctly  solved  76  % #############################


print(sum(range(0,  7)))


What is the output of this code?
Do you know the story of the brilliant mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss?  When 8-year old Gauss went to school, his math teacher sought a break. He told his class to solve the problem of adding all consecutive numbers from 1 to 100:  1 + 2 + 3 + ::: + 100.  But as little Gauss promptly reported the solution, the break was over before it began. Surprised (and a bit grumpy as the story goes), the teacher asked the boy how he had come up with a solution so quickly. Gauss explained his simple solution. He  organized  the  sequence  into  pairs  of  numbers  each summing up to 101:  1 + 100;2 + 99;3 + 98;:::;50 + 51. There are 50 such pairs, so the total result was 50101 = 5050.



5.11.   SUM AND RANGE FUNCTIONS	79


Yet, the modern-time little Gauss would be even lazier. He  would  type  the  following  one-liner  into  his  mobile Python app:  sum(range(1,101)).   The range function returns a sequence starting from the rst value (inclu-sive) and ending at the second value (exclusive).   The sum function sums up the values of this sequence. Com-bining both functions sums up the sequence from 1100. Although your computer uses a brute-force approach, it computes the result faster than any humandumb, but blazingly fast!

The correct solution 

21

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 46 31 11 8 8

Incorrect -9 -24 -44 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



80	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.12	Append Function for Lists


Puzzle 12

############################# ##  id  341
##  Puzzle  Elo  821
##  Correctly  solved  71  % #############################


cubes  =  [1,  8,  27] cubes.append(4  **  3) print(cubes)


What is the output of this code?
This puzzle shows how you can add a new value to the end of the list using the append() function.  Before ap-pending, the Python interpreter evaluates the expression given within the brackets.   Recall that the ** operator returns the power function, i.e., 4  **  3 reads four to the power of three.




The correct solution 

[1,  8,  27,  64]



5.12.   APPEND FUNCTION FOR LISTS	81


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 46 32 11 8 8

Incorrect -9 -23 -44 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



82	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.13	Overshoot Slicing


Puzzle 13

############################# ##  id  335
##  Puzzle  Elo  829
##  Correctly  solved  83  % #############################


word  =  "galaxy" print(word[4:50])


What is the output of this code?
This puzzle introduces a special feature of slicing. As a recap, Python slicing means to access a subsequence of a sequence type using the notation [start:end]. We show here that slicing is robust even if the end index over-shoots the maximal sequence index. So the big take away from this puzzle isthat nothing unexpected happens if slicing overshoots sequence indices.



The correct solution 

xy



5.13.   OVERSHOOT SLICING	83


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 46 32 11 8 8

Incorrect -9 -23 -44 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



84	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.14	Modulo Operator



Puzzle 14

############################# ##  id  317
##  Puzzle  Elo  835
##  Correctly  solved  62  % #############################


x  =  51  %  3 print(x)


What is the output of this code?
When I studied computer science, the professors pushed us  to  learn  the  theory  behind  modulo  operations  and residual classes. But many of us lacked motivation to do so.  We could not see why calculating the remainder of the division, i.e., modulo, is such an important concept.
Yet, many practical code projects later, I must ad-mit that modulo plays a role in many of them. Learning modulo is not optional.  Suppose your code has a main loop and you want to execute a monitoring function each thousandth iteration i. Modulo is your friend here: sim-ply use the fact that for every thousandth iteration, the result of i%1000 is zero.



5.14.   MODULO OPERATOR	85


Learning these small code patterns is the key to be-coming a great coder.   You must know them by heart, without much thinking.   This frees your mental energy and allows you to focus on the big picture. You will pro-duce better and more meaningful code.  In fact, one of the main ideas of the website Finxter.com is to burn these small code patterns into your head.

The correct solution 

0

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 46 32 11 8 8

Incorrect -9 -23 -44 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



86	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.15	Branching


Puzzle 15

############################# ##  id  148
##  Puzzle  Elo  845
##  Correctly  solved  36  % #############################

def  if_confusion(x,  y): if  x  >  y:
if  x  -  5  >  0: x  =  y
return  "A"  if  y  ==  y  +  y  else  "B" elif  x  +  y  >  0:
while  x  >  y:  x  -=  1 while  y  >  x:  y  -=  1 if  x  ==  y:
return  "E" else:
if  x  -  2  >  y  -  4: x_old  =  x x  =  y  *  y
y  =  2  *  x_old
if  (x  -  4)  **  2  >  (y  -  7)  **  2: return  "C"
return  "D" return  "H"

print(if_confusion(3,  7))



5.15.   BRANCHING	87


What is the output of this code?
Now it is getting interesting! When I made this puz-zle, I thought that it might be too simple.  But look at the numbers:  only 36% of our users solved it.  An inter-esting observation is that the puzzle still has a low Elo rating.  This indicates that nxters with higher Elo can solve  it  easily.   Hence,  these  intermediate  to  advanced coders  have  low  error  rates  and  push  it  down  the  Elo ladder. But nxters with lower Elo ratings struggle with the puzzle.
Here are a few tips for the latter group.   Never let the sheer mass of code intimidate you.  You do not have to  read  each  and  every  line  to  adhere  to  any  kind  of perfectionism. Your computer does not execute the code strictly from top to bottom and you shouldn’t as well. Instead, start where the programm execution starts:  at the bottom with the function call if_confusion(3,  7). Now you know that x=3 and y=7.  Then you proceed to do what the interpreter does.   As x>y is false, you can skip the whole upper part of the function. Similarly, you can skip the if branch for x-2>y-4.  It’s easy to see that the function returns ’H’.



The correct solution 

H



88	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 46 33 11 8 8

Incorrect -9 -22 -44 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.16.   NEGATIVE INDICES	89

5.16	Negative Indices



Puzzle 16

############################# ##  id  332
##  Puzzle  Elo  848
##  Correctly  solved  54  % #############################


x  =  ’cool’
print(x[-1]  +  x[-2]
+  x[-4]  +  x[-3])


What is the output of this code?
You can index single characters in strings using the bracket notation.   The rst character has index 0,  the second index 1, and so on.  Did you ever want to access the last element in a string?   Counting the indices can be a real pain for long strings with more than 810 char-acters.   But no worries, Python has a language feature for this.  Instead of starting counting from the left, you can also start from the right.  Access the last  character with the negative index -1, the second last with the index -2, and so on.  In summary, there are two ways to index sequence positions, from the left and from the right.



90	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


The correct solution 

loco

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 46 33 11 8 8

Incorrect -9 -22 -44 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.17.   THE FOR LOOP	91

5.17	The For Loop


Puzzle 17

############################# ##  id  348
##  Puzzle  Elo  858
##  Correctly  solved  67  % #############################


words  =  [’cat’,  ’mouse’] for  word  in  words:
print(len(word))


What is the output of this code?
Repetition  is  everywhere.	The  sun  goes  up  every morning and after winter comes spring.   As coders, we model and simulate the real world and create our own worlds with our own laws and repetitions.  Suppose you want to program a web server that repeats forever the following behavior.  Wait for a user request and answer it.  How can you program the web server to repeat this behavior thousands of times?
The naive approach is to put the sequence of steps into the source code itself. In other words, copy and paste the sequence of steps thousands of times.  Yet, repeated code is redundant and hard to read, debug, and maintain.



92	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


As programmers, we should avoid redundant code at all costs.
The Python for loop statement is a way out of re-dundant code.  You write code only once and put it into dierent contexts.  For example, the loop variable (i.e., word in the puzzle) accounts for the dierent contexts of loop executions.  In the puzzle, the variable word takes rst the value ‘cat’ and second the value ‘mouse’.
Among the ingredients that make a programming lan-guage powerful are control ow statements. The Python for loop is one such control ow statement.   It repeats execution of the code body for all sequence elements iterating over all elements in the order of the sequence. In the puzzle, we print out the length of each word.









The correct solution 




3 5



5.17.   THE FOR LOOP	93


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 46 34 11 8 8

Incorrect -9 -21 -44 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



94	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.18	Functions and Naming


Puzzle 18

############################# ##  id  358
##  Puzzle  Elo  899
##  Correctly  solved  61  % #############################


def  func(x): return  x  +  1

f  =  func
print(f(2)  +  func(2))


What is the output of this code?
Too  much  redundant  code  indicates  poor  program-ming style.  So how to avoid redundant code?  Use func-tions.  Functions make code more general.  Suppose you want to calculate the square root of 145. You could either calculate it for the specic value 145 or dene a function that calculates the square root for any value x.
We  say  that  a  function  encapsulates  a  sequence  of program instructions.  The ideal function solves a single semantic high-level goal. For instance, you can encapsu-late a complex task into a function, such as searching the



5.18.   FUNCTIONS AND NAMING	95


web for specic keywords. In this way, the complex task becomes a simple one-liner:  calling the function.  Func-tions enable others to reuse your code and allow you to reuse other people’s code. You are standing on the shoul-ders of giants.
You can dene a function with the keyword def, fol-lowed  by  a  name  and  the  arguments  of  the  function. The  Python  interpreter  maintains  a  symbol  table  that stores all function denitions, i.e., mappings from func-tion names  to function objects.   In this way, the inter-preter can relate each occurrence of the function name to the dened function object.  Just remember:  a single function object can have zero, one, or even many names.
In the puzzle,  we assign the function object to the name func and then reassign it to the new name f.  We then use both the names in the code. Upon the function call, the Python interpreter will nd the function in the symbol table and execute it.  This can make your code more readable when calling the same function in dierent contexts.





The correct solution 


6



96	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 36 12 8 8

Incorrect -8 -19 -43 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.19.   CONCATENATING SLICES	97

5.19	Concatenating Slices


Puzzle 19

############################# ##  id  334
##  Puzzle  Elo  954
##  Correctly  solved  45  % #############################


word  =  "galaxy"
print(word[:-2]  +  word[-2:])


What is the output of this code?
This puzzle revisits the important concept of slicing. Slicing is one of the most popular features in Python. Understand the term and concept of slicing and you are at least among the intermediate Python programmers.
Slicing, like indexing, retrieves specic characters from a sequence such as a string. But while indexing retrieves only a single character, slicing retrieves a whole substring within an index range.
Use the bracket notation for slicing with the start and end position identiers. For example, word[i:j] returns the substring starting from index i (included) and ending in index j (excluded).



98	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


You can also skip the position identier before or af-ter the slicing colon.  This indicates that the slice starts from the rst or last position, respectively. For example, word[:i]  +  word[i:] returns the same string as word.

The correct solution 

galaxy

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 38 14 8 8

Incorrect -8 -17 -41 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.20.   ARBITRARY ARGUMENTS	99

5.20	Arbitrary Arguments


Puzzle 20

############################# ##  id  365
##  Puzzle  Elo  1005
##  Correctly  solved  57  % #############################

def  func(a,  *args): print(a)
for  arg  in  args: print(arg)

func("A",  "B",  "C")


What is the output of this code?
Suppose you want to create a function that allows an arbitrary number of arguments.   An example is recog-nizing faces in images where each image consists of one or more pixel arrays.  You achieve this by prexing the function argument with the asterisk operator (or star op-erator), e.g., *pixels.  Now, you can pass a tuple or a list  as  a  function  argument,  which  you  can  access  via indexing or iteration in a loop.
You can combine both types of parameters in a func-tion: normal positional parameters (e.g., a in the puzzle)



100	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


and an arbitrary length parameter list (e.g., *args in the puzzle).  If you call the function with many arguments, the interpreter lls in name slot(s) for normal positional arguments rst. The arbitrary argument list handles the rest of the arguments.

The correct solution 



A B C

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 40 15 8 8

Incorrect -8 -15 -40 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.21.   INDIRECT RECURSION	101

5.21	Indirect Recursion



Puzzle 21

############################# ##  id  76
##  Puzzle  Elo  1032
##  Correctly  solved  54  % #############################


def  ping(i): if  i  >  0:
return  pong(i  -  1) return  "0"

def  pong(i): if  i  >  0:
return  ping(i  -  1) return  "1"

print(ping(29))


What is the output of this code?
Recursion is a powerful tool in your coding toolbox. Understanding it is a key skill on your path to mastery. So what is recursion?  Stephen Hawking used a concise explanation: to understand recursion, one must rst un-derstand recursion.



102	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


This puzzle uses indirect recursion:  function f calls function  g  which  calls  function  f.	Each  function  call solves  a  slightly  easier  problem.   In  recursive  problem solving, a function knows the result for some base cases (i.e., the naive solutions).  It breaks a complex problem into a combination of less complex subproblems.  As the subproblems are getting easier, they nally reach the base cases.  These are the least complex subproblems and we know their solutions. The idea is to build the solution of the complex problem from the solutions of the subprob-lems.
So when you call ping(29), the ping function reduces this question to pong(28)an easier problem. The call-ing  function  ping  waits  for  pong  to  return  a  solution. But pong asks back ping(27) and waits for a solution. On a higher level, ping receives odd and pong even ar-gument values for the initial input i=29.  Thus, the last call is pong(0), which returns 1.  Each calling function is waiting for the result of the called function. Each call-ing  function  receives  the  value  1  and  returns  it  to  its parent calling function.  Finally, the top-most functional instance ping(29) returns the value 1 as the nal result.



The correct solution 

1



5.21.   INDIRECT RECURSION	103


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 41 16 8 8

Incorrect -8 -14 -39 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



104	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.22	String Slicing

Puzzle 22

############################# ##  id  333
##  Puzzle  Elo  1038
##  Correctly  solved  53  % #############################


word  =  "bender" print(word[1:4])


What is the output of this code?
The language feature slicing does not only apply to lists, but also to strings. As both lists and strings are se-quencing types, slicing is only one among several similari-ties. For example, you can also iterate over the characters in a string using the for loop (e.g., for  c  in  word).
Only half of the Finxter users can solve this puzzle. The main problem is to identify the correct end index of the slice.   Recap:  the end index is not included in the slice.  Here is how you can nd the correct solution (in bold).

b    e    n    d    e    r 0    1    2     3    4    5



5.22.   STRING SLICING	105


The correct solution 

end

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 41 17 8 8

Incorrect -8 -14 -38 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



106	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.23	Slice Assignment



Puzzle 23

############################# ##  id  342
##  Puzzle  Elo  1104
##  Correctly  solved  52  % #############################


customers  =  [’Marie’,  ’Anne’,  ’Donald’] customers[2:4]  =  [’Barack’,  ’Olivia’,  ’Sophia’] print(customers)


What is the output of this code?
A  great  coder  seeks  the  cleanest  and  shortest  way to accomplish their goals.   This puzzle demonstrates a Python trick that I found very useful: slice assignments.
Suppose you work in a biotech startup on DNA se-quence modeling. You maintain dierent DNA sequences as lists of string values.  To simulate recombinations of DNA sequences, you change subsequences of the list on a regular basis.  In this case, slicing is your best friend:  It helps you to read specic subsequences.  Moreover, slice assignments enable you to replace, append, or clear whole subsequences.



5.23.   SLICE ASSIGNMENT	107


In the puzzle,  we have a list of customers that are partially replaced by new customers.  The puzzle shows how the length of the original sequence may change due to the slice assignment.   The slice assignment inserts a list of three customers into the customer list. A beautiful way to clear the list is:
customers[:]	=  [].

The correct solution 

[‘Marie’,  ‘Anne’,  ‘Barack’,  ‘Olivia’, ‘Sophia’]

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 43 20 8 8

Incorrect -8 -12 -35 -47 -47


Your new Elo rating 



108	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.24	Default Arguments


Puzzle 24

############################# ##  id  360
##  Puzzle  Elo  1152
##  Correctly  solved  50  % #############################


def  ask(prompt,  retries=4,  output=’Error’): for  _  in  range(retries):
response  =  input(prompt).lower() if  response  in  [’y’,  ’yes’]:
return  True
if  response  in  [’n’,  ’no’]: return  False
print(output)


print(ask(’Want  to  know  the  answer?’,  5))


Is  ask(’Want  to  know  the  answer?’,  5)  a  valid function call?
This puzzle introduces the concept of default argu-ments in Python.
Suppose  you  have  created  a  Python  command  line tool for your business.  The tool requires user conrma-



5.24.   DEFAULT ARGUMENTS	109


tion for dierent activities like writing or deleting les.
To  avoid  redundant  code,  you  have  implemented  a generic  function  that  handles  the  interaction  with  the user. The default behavior should consist of three steps: (1) You ask (prompt) the user a yes/no question; (2) the user enters some response;  (3) as long as the response is invalid,  the function repeats up to four timeseach time printing an error message ‘Error’.  The number of repetitions and the reminder should be customizable via the parameters.
To achieve this, you can specify default arguments as given in the puzzle.  You can use the default parameters by calling ask(’Hi?’). Or you can overwrite them in the order of their denition (one, several, or all parameters).
Also did you notice that single underscore is a valid name  in  Python?   By  convention,  you  can  use  it  as  a throw-away namewhen you don’t really need to access the actual value. In the puzzle, we ask the user four times but do not need to know how often we have already asked.
It  is  interesting  that  only  50%  of  all  Finxter  users solve this puzzle correctly. That’s no better than random guessing.  Partial replacement of default arguments is a new feature to most users.  Is it new to you?  You have to master these basic language features before you can climb to the level of an advanced coder.



110	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


The correct solution 

Yes

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 44 22 9 8

Incorrect -8 -11 -33 -46 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.25.   SLICING AND THE LEN() FUNCTION	111

5.25	 Slicing and the len() Function


Puzzle 25

############################# ##  id  344
##  Puzzle  Elo  1211
##  Correctly  solved  44  % #############################


letters  =  [’a’,  ’b’,  ’c’,  ’d’] print(len(letters[1:-1]))


What is the output of this code?
The goal of this puzzle is to deepen your understand-ing of the important concept of slicing.
Yet, it turned out to be more a test of thoroughness than anything else.  The majority of users cannot solve this puzzleone of the most common errors is to overlook the word len().
The built-in function len() returns the length of a sequence object such as a string or a list.  In the puzzle, we return the length of the list after cutting the head and the tail.  An illuminating example for lack of thorough-ness, which is also the major source of bugs in your code.



112	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


Ask any professional programmer!

The correct solution 

2

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 45 25 9 8

Incorrect -8 -10 -30 -46 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.26.   NESTED LISTS	113

5.26	Nested Lists


Puzzle 26

############################# ##  id  345
##  Puzzle  Elo  1238
##  Correctly  solved  39  % #############################


a  =  [’a’,  ’b’] n  =  [1,  2]
x  =  [a,  n] print(x[1])


What is the output of this code?
Many practical code projects use lists containing not only primitive but also complex data types.   Examples of  primitive  data  types  are  integers,  strings,  or  oats. Examples of complex data types are customer objects, camera events, or even lists.
In the puzzle, we show the latter:  there is a nested list that contains two other lists.  Accessing an element of this list using the index notation returns a list itself.
Python is a dynamically typed programming language. Hence, there can be hybrid lists containing dierent data types. However, this is not too common.



114	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


The correct solution 

[1,  2]

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 45 27 9 8

Incorrect -8 -10 -28 -46 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.27.   CLEARING SUBLISTS	115

5.27	Clearing Sublists






Puzzle 27

############################# ##  id  343
##  Puzzle  Elo  1248
##  Correctly  solved  47  % #############################


letters  =  [’a’,  ’b’,  ’c’,
’d’,  ’e’,  ’f’,  ’g’] letters[1:]  =  [] print(letters)


What is the output of this code?
In verbose programming languages such as Java, you have to iterate over a list to remove subsequent elements. In Python, a simple one-liner does that for you. Use the slice notation to select a sequence of items in the list. This is the lefthand side of your equation. Then overwrite the selected sequence with the empty (or any other) list. It is because of this kind of clarity and simplicity that Python has become so popular nowadays.



116	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


The correct solution 

[‘a’]

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 45 27 10 8

Incorrect -8 -10 -28 -45 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.28.   THE FIBONACCI SERIES	117

5.28	The Fibonacci Series


Puzzle 28

############################# ##  id  346
##  Puzzle  Elo  1300
##  Correctly  solved  48  % #############################


#  Fibonacci  series: a,  b  =  0,  1
while  b  <  5: print(b)
a,  b  =  b,  a  +  b


What is the output of this code?
The  Fibonacci  series  was  discovered  by  the  Italian mathematician Leonardo Fibonacci in 1202 and even ear-lier by Indian mathematicians. The series appears in un-expected areas such as economics, mathematics, art, and nature.
In the puzzle, we give a simple algorithm to calculate the Fibonacci numbers.   The series starts with the Fi-bonacci numbers zero and one. The algorithm calculates the next element of the series as the sum of the previ-ous two elements.   For this,  the algorithm only has to



118	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


keep track of the last two elements in the series.  Thus, we maintain two variables a and b, being the second last and last element in the series,  respectively.   This com-putation repeats until the while condition evaluates to False, i.e., until b5.
For clarity of the code, I used the language feature of iterable unpacking in the rst and the last line.  This feature works as follows.   On the left-hand side of the assignment, there is any sequence of variables.  On the right-hand side of the assignment, we specify the values to be assigned to these variables.
Note that all expressions on the right-hand side are rst evaluated before they are assigned. This is an impor-tant property for our algorithm.  Without this property, the last line would be wrong as the expression a+b would consider the wrong value for a.









The correct solution 



1  1  2  3



5.28.   THE FIBONACCI SERIES	119


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 46 30 10 8

Incorrect -8 -9 -25 -45 -47


Your new Elo rating 



120	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.29	 The continue Statement and the Modulo Operator


Puzzle 29

############################# ##  id  355
##  Puzzle  Elo  1311
##  Correctly  solved  54  % #############################

for  num  in  range(2,  8): if  not  num  %  2:
continue print(num)


What is the output of this code?
This  puzzle  prints  all  odd  values  between  two  (in-cluded) and eight (excluded).  To achieve this, we check whether the current value num can be divided by 2 with-out remainder.   Python,  like other languages,  uses the percentage symbol % as modulo operator.  This modulo operator returns the remainder when dividing a number n by another number x, i.e., n  -  (n//x)  *  x. For exam-ple, it returns 12  %  2  =  0 if there is no remainder and 13  %  2  =  1 if the remainder is 1.
There is a second language feature in the puzzle, which



5.29.   CONTINUE AND MODULO	121


is the continue operator.  This operator commands the interpreter to terminate the current loop iteration. Then, the interpreter proceeds with the next iteration.
Hence, if the loop variable has an even value, the in-terpreter skips the print statement.  If the loop variable has an odd value, the interpreter skips the continue state-ment.

The correct solution 



3 5 7

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 46 31 10 8

Incorrect -8 -9 -24 -45 -47


Your new Elo rating 



122	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.30	 Indexing Revisited and The Range Sequence


Puzzle 30

############################# ##  id  351
##  Puzzle  Elo  1346
##  Correctly  solved  52  % #############################

print(range(5,  10)[-1]) print(range(0,  10,  3)[2]) print(range(-10,  -100,  -30)[1])


What is the output of this code?
If  this  book  can  teach  you  only  one  thing,  it  is  a thorough understanding of the most important Python concepts such as indexing and slicing.  I cannot empha-size enough how important these concepts are for your practical work.  The goal of this puzzle is to strengthen your understanding of these. The puzzle consists of three quick tasks about indexing and the range function. Rep-etition is an eective teacher!
The rst line prints the last element of the range se-quence.  A short reminder:  the upper bound range pa-rameter is not included in the sequence. The second line



5.30.   INDEXING AND RANGE	123


prints the third element (not the second) of the range sequence  0,  3,  6,  9.   Thus,  the  step  size  is  three  as dened in the last optional range parameter.  The third line prints the second element of the range sequence -10, -40,  -70 with step size -30.
Many  nxters  have  problems  with  indexing  or  the range function. One common mistake is that they select the  wrong  element  from  the  sequenceforgetting  that the rst element of any sequence has index 0, not index 1.
It is the procient use of the basics that dierentiates excellent from average programmers.





The correct solution 





9


6


-40



124	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 46 33 11 8

Incorrect -8 -9 -22 -44 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.31.   MATRIX SEARCH	125

5.31	Searching a Sorted Matrix



Puzzle 31

############################# ##  id  112
##  Puzzle  Elo  1353
##  Correctly  solved  41  % #############################


def  matrix_find(matrix,  value):
if  not  matrix  or  not  matrix[0]: return  False

j  =  len(matrix)  -  1 for  row  in  matrix:
while  row[j]  >  value: j  =  j  -  1
if  j  ==  -1: return  False
if  row[j]  ==  value: return  True
return  False

matrix  =  [[3,  4,  4,  6], [6,  8,  11,  12], [6,  8,  11,  15], [9,  11,  12,  17]]
print(matrix_find(matrix=matrix,  value=11))



126	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


What is the output of this code?
The puzzles are getting harder now.   The challenge is shifting from understanding syntactical to semantical code snippets and algorithms.   If you thoroughly mas-ter  these  types  of  code  puzzles,  you  will  join  the  club of advanced coders.  Thus, you open up the opportunity to work in one of the highest paid job industries in the world.
This algorithm is a beautiful way to search a value in a sorted matrix without visiting all values.  In the next paragraph, I describe the matrix concept and the sorted property.
A matrix is a table of values consisting of rows and columns.   This puzzle  represents it  as a  list  of integer lists. Hence, we can access matrix values with the index-ing and slicing notation.  Do you see the importance of understanding the basics?   The matrix is sorted  as the integers in the rows and columns increase monotonically with the row and column number.
The function matrix_find takes a sorted integer ma-trix and an integer value.  It returns True if the matrix contains the integer value. Otherwise, it returns False.
In the rst two lines, the algorithm checks whether the matrix is empty and returns False if this is the case. Then, the for loop iterates over rows of the matrix start-ing with the rst row.



5.31.   MATRIX SEARCH	127


But instead of searching the whole matrix, the algo-rithm uses a smarter strategy.  It skips whole rows and columns at a time using the sorted property.
The algorithm starts with the rst row and the last column j  =  len(matrix)  -  1.  Then, it skips one col-umn at-a-time by decreasing the parameter j monoton-ically (j  =  j  -  1).  Why can it skip the whole column? Because  as  long  as  the  column  value  row[j]  is  larger than the searched value value, all following elements of column j are larger than the searched value (sorted prop-erty).  Thus, we are sure that our searched value is not in column j and we can skip this column completely by decreasing j.
If the column value row[j] is smaller than the searched value, the algorithm skips this whole row by going to the next row.  Why can it skip the whole row?  Because it currently checks the largest value in the row. If this value is smaller than the searched value, all other values are as well.
In  summary,  the  idea  of  this  great  algorithm  from Keith Schwartz2  is to skip either one row or one column in each step.  Thus, for a quadratic matrix with n rows and columns,  the algorithm inspects approximately 2n cells.  Note that a naive algorithm would inspect all n2

2http://www.keithschwarz.com/interesting/code/ matrix-find/MatrixFind.python.html



128	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


cells which is much slower.

The correct solution 

True

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 46 33 11 8

Incorrect -8 -9 -22 -44 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.32.   MAX PROFIT	129

5.32	Maximum Prot Algorithm


Puzzle 32

############################# ##  id  36
##  Puzzle  Elo  1407
##  Correctly  solved  65  % #############################


def  maximum_profit(prices):
’’’Maximum  profit  of  a  single  buying  low  and ,!	selling  high’’’

profit  =  0
for  i,  buy_price  in  enumerate(prices): sell_price  =  max(prices[i:]) profit  =  max(profit,  sell_price  -,!     buy_price)
return  profit

#  Ethereum  daily  prices  in  Dec  2017  ($) eth_prices  =  [455,  460,  465,  451,  414,  415,  441] print(maximum_profit(prices=eth_prices))


What is the output of this code?
This puzzle presents an algorithmic problem with prac-tical value for stock market analysis.   Suppose you are trading the cryptocurrency Ethereum.  How much prot



130	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


can you make by buying low and selling high based on historical data?
The  function  maximum_profit  takes  as  input  a  se-quence of prices, e.g., a week of Ethereum prices in De-cember  2017.	It  returns  the  largest  possible  prot  of buying low and selling high.
The algorithm works as follows.   It iterates over all sequence  values:   each  is  a  possible  buying  point  (i.e., buy_price).  Note that the enumerate function returns both the index i of the next price in the sequence and the price itself.
Next, the algorithm uses the index i of the current buying point to get all potential selling points after buy-ing.  We use slicing to get these, i.e., prices[i:].  The max function nds the highest selling point.   For each buying/selling pair (buy_price,  sell_price), it calcu-lates the prot as the dierence between the prices at the selling and the buying points, i.e., sell_price-buy_price. The variable profit maintains the largest possible prot: $27 on $414 invested capital.




The correct solution 


27



5.32.   MAX PROFIT	131


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 36 12 8

Incorrect -8 -8 -19 -43 -47


Your new Elo rating 



132	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.33	Bubble Sort Algorithm


Puzzle 33

############################# ##  id  158
##  Puzzle  Elo  1458
##  Correctly  solved  67  % #############################


def  bubble_sort(lst): ’’’Implementation  of  bubble  sort ,!     algorithm’’’

for  border  in  range(len(lst)-1,  0,  -1): for  i  in  range(border):
if  lst[i]  >  lst[i  +  1]:
lst[i],  lst[i  +  1]  =  lst[i  +  1], ,!	lst[i]
return  lst

list_to_sort  =  [27,  0,  71,  70,  27,  63,  90] print(bubble_sort(lst=list_to_sort))


What is the output of this code?
The bubble sort algorithm works exactly as its name suggests.  It sorts an input list by treating each element as a bubble that climbs up the list. Each bubble rises as long as it is greater than the list elements. If the bubble



5.33.   BUBBLE SORT ALGORITHM	133


element  is  smaller  or  equal  than  a  list  element  x,  the bubble stops rising, and the larger list element x starts to bubble up.
The precise algorithm works as follows.   The outer index variable border marks the index after which the right-hand list elements are already sorted.   The inner index variable i goes from left to right until it reaches the index variable border.   On its way to the right, it switches two subsequent list elements if the rst element is larger than the second element.  Hence, after the rst pass, the largest element in the list is on the right.  As this right-most element is already sorted, we can reduce the size of the list to be sorted by onei.e., decrement the variable border.   Next,  the second largest element will rise to the top and the procedure repeats.
Study this basic algorithm carefully. Every great coder must know it.








The correct solution 


[0,  27,  27,  63,  70,  71,  90]



134	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 38 14 8

Incorrect -8 -8 -17 -41 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.34.   JOINING STRINGS	135

5.34	Joining Strings


Puzzle 34

############################# ##  id  367
##  Puzzle  Elo  1437
##  Correctly  solved  53  % #############################

def  concatenation(*args,  sep="/"): return  sep.join(args)

print(concatenation("A",  "B",  "C",  sep=","))


What is the output of this code?
String concatenation is the process of creating a string by appending string arguments. The given function takes an arbitrary number of string arguments as specied by the *args keyword. The parameter sep declares the sep-arator string to be used to glue together two strings. The separator string comes as a keyword argument. The rea-son is that the *args argument comprises an arbitrary number of values.  The keyword argument helps to dif-ferentiate whether the last parameter is part of *args or the sep argument.
The  function  concatenation  is  a  wrapper  for  the join  function  to  concatenate  strings.   The  join  func-



136	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


tion is dened in the string object sep.  It concatenates an arbitrary number of strings using the separator to glue them together.  Both functions achieve the same thing, but the rst may be more convenient because the sepa-rator is a normal argument.  Yet, you will nd yourself using the join function on a regular basis without writ-ing  your  own  wrapper  functions.   So  you  may  as  well learn its proper use now.

The correct solution 

A,B,C

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 37 13 8

Incorrect -8 -8 -18 -42 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.35.   ARITHMETIC CALCULATIONS	137

5.35	Arithmetic Calculations


Puzzle 35

############################# ##  id  320
##  Puzzle  Elo  1486
##  Correctly  solved  7  % #############################

x  =  5  *  3.8  -  1 print(x)


What is the output of this code?
This puzzle has only one challenge. But this challenge is so hard that only 7% of all nxters can overcome it: oating point operators.
Most nxters believe that the puzzle asks for the re-sult of the computation here.   But this is a trap!   The purpose of solving Python puzzles is to understand code in a precise and deep manner.  Deep understanding tells you  that  the  oat  3.80  causes  the  interpreter  to  per-form oating point arithmetic. Thus, the result is not an integeri.e.,  the value 18but a oati.e.,  the value 18.0.
These kinds of mistakes seem to be negligible but they have important eects on the correctness of your code



138	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


base. So if you got this puzzle wrong, be grateful for the lesson and go on.

The correct solution 

18.0

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 39 15 8

Incorrect -8 -8 -16 -40 -47


Your new Elo rating 



5.36.   BINARY SEARCH	139

5.36	Binary Search


Puzzle 36

############################# ##  id  159
##  Puzzle  Elo  1492
##  Correctly  solved  33  % #############################

def  bsearch(l,  value): lo,  hi  =  0,  len(l)-1 while  lo  <=  hi:
mid  =  (lo  +  hi)  //  2 if  l[mid]  <  value:
lo  =  mid  +  1 elif  value  <  l[mid]:
hi  =  mid  -  1 else:
return  mid return  -1


l  =  [0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6] x  =  6
print(bsearch(l,x))


What is the output of this code?
How to nd a value in a sorted list?   The naive al-gorithm  compares  each  element  in  the  list  against  the



140	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


searched value.   For example, consider a list with 1024 elements.   The naive algorithm performs 1024 compar-isons in the worst case.
The function bsearch is a more eective way to nd a value in a sorted list. For n elements in the list, it needs to perform only in the order of log(n) comparisons. Hence, a list with 1024 elements would take Bsearch only up to log(1024) = 10 comparisonsmaking it much faster
Why is Bsearch so fast?   Bsearch uses the property that the list is already sorted. It checks only the element in the middle position between two indices lo and hi. If this middle element is smaller than the searched value, all left-hand elements will be smaller as well because of the sorted list. The algorithm can skip all left-hand elements by setting the lower index lo to the position right of the middle element. If this middle element is larger than the searched value, all right-hand elements will be larger as well.  Hence, we set the upper index hi to the position left of the middle element.  Only if the middle element is exactly the same as the searched value, we return the index of this position.  This procedure is repeated until we nd the searched value or there are no values left. In each loop iteration, we reduce the search space, i.e., the number of elements between lo and hi, by half.



5.36.   BINARY SEARCH	141


The correct solution 

6

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 40 15 8

Incorrect -8 -8 -15 -40 -47


Your new Elo rating 



142	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.37	Modifying Lists in Loops


Puzzle 37

############################# ##  id  349
##  Puzzle  Elo  1504
##  Correctly  solved  58  % #############################

words  =  [’cat’,  ’mouse’,  ’dog’] for  word  in  words[:]:
if  len(word)  >  3: words.insert(0,  word)
print(words[0])


What is the output of this code?
How to modify a sequence while iterating over it? For example, you want to prepare a data set of house prices for a machine learning algorithm to predict the market prices of new houses.   Your goal is to remove the data points with prices lower than $20;000 to clean the data of outliers.
This problem is not as simple as removing elements from a sequence over which you iterate.  Doing this can lead to unspecied behavior as explained in the follow-ing. Before entering the for loop, the Python interpreter creates an iterator object.  The iterator object provides



5.37.   MODIFYING LISTS IN LOOPS	143


a method next() returning the next element in the se-quence.   To  achieve  this,  the  iterator  extracts,  at  cre-ation time, information like the size of the sequence.  If you modify the sequence on the go,  this information becomes invalid. For example, if the number of elements changes at runtime, the iterator object may believe it is ready, while there are still objects in it.
The puzzle presents one solution to this problem. The code copies the list rst and iterates over the copy. With this method,  you can safely modify the original list as this will not aect the copy in any way.
So how to copy the sequence?  The most convenient way to achieve this is by using the slice notation as shown in the puzzle.


The correct solution 

mouse


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 40 15 8

Incorrect -8 -8 -15 -40 -47



144	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


Your new Elo rating 



5.38.   THE LAMBDA FUNCTION	145

5.38	The Lambda Function


Puzzle 38

############################# ##  id  370
##  Puzzle  Elo  1558
##  Correctly  solved  89  % #############################

def  make_incrementor(n): return  lambda  x:  x  +  n

f  =  make_incrementor(42) print(f(0))
print(f(1))


What is the output of this code?
This puzzle introduces an advanced language feature: lambda functions.   Lambda functions are rooted in the mathematical area of lambda calculus.   One of the pi-oneers of this area was Alonzo Church.   He introduced lambda functions in 1936 even before the appearance of the rst computers.
Lambda functions exist in a wide range of languages for functional programming.   They are not only at the heart of functional programming languages, they are also the basis of many advanced Python language features.



146	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


For example, the modern language Scala for parallel pro-gramming combines traditional language elements (e.g., from Java) with functional elements (e.g., lambda func-tions). So how do lambda functions work?
A lambda function is an anonymous function with-out identier.   After the lambda keyword, the function takes one or more arbitrary arguments.  The arguments are comma-separated and nished by a colon.  After the colon  follows  a  single  expression.   Yet,  this  expression can  consist  of  complex  calculations  using  the  specied argument variables.   The lambda function then returns the result of this expression.   Hence,  lambda functions are syntactical shortcuts for a subclass of normal Python functions.
In the puzzle,  the function make_incrementor cre-ates a lambda function at runtime.  The created lambda function increases an element x by a xed value n. For ex-ample, the incrementor function in the puzzle increments a value by 42. We assign this function to the variable f. Then we print the results when incrementing the values 0 and 1 by the incrementor 42.


The correct solution 



42



5.38.   THE LAMBDA FUNCTION	147


43

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 42 17 8

Incorrect -8 -8 -13 -38 -47


Your new Elo rating 



148	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.39    Multi-line Strings and the New-line Character


Puzzle 39

############################# ##  id  325
##  Puzzle  Elo  1623
##  Correctly  solved  71  % #############################


print(""" A
B C
"""  ==  "\nA\nB\nC\n")


What is the output of this code?
What is going on in this puzzle?   The basic idea is to show two dierent ways of writing the same multi-line string literal in Python.
The rst is the direct way to write a multi-line string in Python: As a string with multiple code lines enclosed by triple-quotes ’’’...’’’ or """...""".
The second is a more concise way to write the same string. We specify the line breaks with the new line char-



5.39.   MULTI-LINE AND NEW-LINE	149


acter ’\n’.
These two ways of breaking lines in Python strings are the basis for advanced features and code snippets.

The correct solution 

True

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 43 20 9

Incorrect -8 -8 -12 -35 -46


Your new Elo rating 



150	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.40	Escaping

Puzzle 40

############################# ##  id  323
##  Puzzle  Elo  1629
##  Correctly  solved  25  % #############################


print(’P"yt\’h"on’)


What is the output of this code?
This puzzle introduces several Python language fea-tures about quotes in string literals.  It requires a clear understanding of the concept of escaping.   Escaping is an important concept in most programming languages. You are not an advanced coder without understanding at least the basic idea of escaping.
Recap, strings can be enclosed either with single quotes ’...’  or double quotes "...".  These two options are semantically equivalent, i.e., they do the same thing.
But what happens if you write, say, a small conver-sation with direct speech?


"Alice  said:	"Hey  Bob!"  and  went  on."



5.40.   ESCAPING	151


(wrong)


The double quotes cannot be a part of a string en-closed in double quotes. Trying this ends the string pre-maturely. Here, the best case is that the interpreter com-plains about the strange syntax of the random character sequence after the premature ending of your string.
Yet, there is an easy x. You can avoid this problem by enclosing the string with single quotes:


’Alice  said:	"Hey  Bob!"  and  went  on.’ (right)


The double quotes can now be part of the string itself without ending the string sequence.   The opposite also works, i.e., writing a single quote within a string enclosed in double quotes.
So far so good. But there is still one question left that is also the main reason why only 25% of nxters can solve this puzzle:  escaping.  What if you want to put a single quote within a string enclosed by single quotes?
In the puzzle, we solve this using the escape character: the backslash n. When put before special characters like the  single  quote,  it  escapes  them.	In  other  words,  it changes the meaning of these characters.  For example, the single quote has the meaning of starting or ending a



152	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


string.   Only when escaped, the interpreter changes its meaning to the normal single quote character.

The correct solution 

P"yt’h"on

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 43 21 9

Incorrect -8 -8 -12 -34 -46


Your new Elo rating 



5.41.   FIBONACCI	153

5.41	Fibonacci


Puzzle 41

############################# ##  id  359
##  Puzzle  Elo  1661
##  Correctly  solved  60  % #############################


def  fibo(n):
"""Return  list  containing Fibonacci  series  up  to  n. """

result  =  [] a,  b  =  0,  1 while  a  <  n:
result.append(a) a,  b  =  b,  a  +  b
return  result

fib100  =  fibo(100) print(fib100[-1]  ==
fib100[-2]  +  fib100[-3])


What is the output of this code?
Recap the Fibonacci series is the series of numbers that  arises  when  repeatedly  summing  up  the  last  two



154	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


numbers starting from 0 and 1. The fibo function in the puzzle calculates all Fibonacci numbers up to the func-tion argument n.  We use the concise method of iterable unpacking  to store the value of b in the variable a and to calculate the new value of b as the sum of both.  We maintain the whole sequence in the list variable result by appending the sequence value a to the end of the list.
The puzzle calculates the Fibonacci sequence up to 100 and stores the whole list in the variable fib100. But to solve the puzzle, you do not have to calculate the whole sequence.   The print statement only compares whether the last element is equal to the sum of the second and third last element in the sequence.  This is true by de-nition of the Fibonacci series.
Humans can solve this puzzle easily using logic and strategic thinking. The Python interpreter, however, must take the brute-force approach of calculating everything from scratch.   This nicely demonstrates your role as a computer programmer.  You are the guiding hand with unlimited power at your ngertips.   But you must use your power wisely because the computer will do exactly what you ask it to do.



The correct solution 

True



5.41.   FIBONACCI	155


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 44 22 9

Incorrect -8 -8 -11 -33 -46


Your new Elo rating 



156	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.42	Quicksort

Puzzle 42

############################# ##  id  195
##  Puzzle  Elo  1672
##  Correctly  solved  67  % #############################

def  qsort1(L): if  L:
return  qsort1([x  for  x  in  L[1:]  if  x  < ,!	L[0]])  +  L[:1]  \
+  qsort1([x  for  x  in  L[1:]  if  x ,!	>=  L[0]])
return  []

def  qsort2(L): if  L:
return  L[:1]  +  qsort2([x  for  x  in  L[1:] ,!	if  x  <  L[0]])  \
+  qsort2([x  for  x  in  L[1:]  if  x ,!	>=  L[0]])
return  []

print(qsort1([0,  33,  22])) print(qsort2([0,  33,  22]))


Which function correctly sorts the list?
This puzzle introduces a recursive algorithm to sort



5.42.   QUICKSORT	157


lists. When executing the functions, you get the following results.


print(qsort1([0,33,22]))  >  output:	[0, 22,  33]

print(qsort2([0,33,22]))  >  output:	[0, 33,  22]


So,  based on this output,  the function qsort1 cor-rectly sorts the list. But why? The algorithm is a variant of the popular quicksort algorithm.  Quicksort selects a pivot element from the list.  In the puzzle, it selects the rst element of the list, i.e., L[0].  Then, the algorithm moves all elements that are smaller than the pivot to the left side.  Similarly, it moves elements that are larger or equal than the pivot to the right side.
This is repeated in a recursive manner for the left and the right lists.  Suppose you create a new list as follows. You put all elements that are smaller than the pivot on the left, then the pivot, then all elements that are larger or equal the pivot on the right. The resulting list feels a bit more sorted, right?  If the two sublists were already sorted, the list would be perfectly sorted.  This is where the recursive call of qsort1 comes into play. It takes over the problem of sorting each sublist by applying the same scheme of pivoting and recursion to the sublist.



158	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


In contrast, the qsort2 function appends both sub-lists to the right of the pivot element.  Hence the list is already unsorted after the rst recursion level.
Solving  these  kinds  of  puzzles  regularly  will  boost your code understanding skills. They not only train your language understanding but also your conceptual think-ing which is even more important for coders at any level.

The correct solution 

qsort1

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 44 23 9

Incorrect -8 -8 -11 -32 -46


Your new Elo rating 



5.43.   UNPACKING KWARGS	159

5.43	 Unpacking Keyword Arguments with Dictionaries


Puzzle 43

############################# ##  id  369
##  Puzzle  Elo  1673
##  Correctly  solved  30  % #############################

def  func(val1=3,  val2=4,  val3=6): return  val1  +  val2  +  val3

values  =  {"val1":9,  "val3":-1} print(func(**values))


What is the output of this code?
Programming is about using lower-level functionality to create higher-level functionality.  In general, any pro-gramming language is a collection of functions that in turn build upon functions provided by the operating sys-tem. You must master the art of building your own code with the help of existing functionality.  Do not reinvent the wheel!
Functions are generic code snippets that can be tai-lored to your needs via keyword arguments.  The puzzle



160	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


shows a function that calculates the sum of three keyword arguments. The keyword arguments are initialized with a default value in case they are not dened by the function caller.  The puzzle introduces two concepts:  dictionaries and unpacking keyword arguments.
1) Dictionaries are Python data structures,  dened via the bracket notation {}, that store key-value pairs. Python dictionaries work like real-world dictionaries: the keys are the words and the values are the explanations. You access the explanation to a given word via the index table.  Similarly, in a Python dictionary, you access the values  using  the  method  of  indexing.   The  indices  (or keys) can be strings,  integers,  or any other immutable data type.
2) An interesting twist in the puzzle is to deliver key-word arguments via a dictionary using the **-operator. The **-operator unpacks the key-value pairs in the dic-tionary and matches those with the keyword arguments. As the second keyword argument val2 is not declared in the dictionary, it is initialized to its default value.





The correct solution 


12



5.43.   UNPACKING KWARGS	161


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 44 23 9

Incorrect -8 -8 -11 -32 -46


Your new Elo rating 



162	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.44	Innity





Puzzle 44

############################# ##  id  356
##  Puzzle  Elo  1701
##  Correctly  solved  40  % #############################

print("Answer") while  True:
pass print("42")


What is the output of this code?
The  question  in  this  puzzle  is  whether  the  second print statement will ever be executed.  The body of the while loop consists of the pass statement.   This state-ment tells the interpreter to do nothing.  Although the while loop does nothing, the interpreter is trapped for-ever because the while condition is True. Thus, our pro-gram wastes scarce CPU cycles until the user interrupts the  execution.   Hence,  no  execution  path  will  execute the second print statement. It is interesting that 60% of nxters get this puzzle wrong.



5.44.   INFINITY	163


The correct solution 

Answer

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 45 25 9

Incorrect -8 -8 -10 -30 -46


Your new Elo rating 



164	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.45	Graph Traversal


Puzzle 45

############################# ##  id  274
##  Puzzle  Elo  1729
##  Correctly  solved  44  % #############################

def  has_path(graph,  v_start,  v_end,  path_len=0): ’’’Graph  has  path  from  v_start  to  v_end’’’

#  Traverse  each  vertex  only  once if  path_len  >=  len(graph):
return  False

#  Direct  path  from  v_start  to  v_end? if  graph[v_start][v_end]:
return  True

#  Indirect  path  via  neighbor  v_nbor? for  v_nbor,  edge  in
,!	enumerate(graph[v_start]):
if  edge:  #  between  v_start  and  v_nbor if  has_path(graph,  v_nbor,  v_end, ,!     path_len + 1):
return  True

return  False



5.45.   GRAPH TRAVERSAL	165



#  The  graph  represented  as  adjancy  matrix G  =  [[1,  1,  0,  0,  0],
[0,  1,  0,  0,  0], [0,  0,  1,  0,  0], [0,  1,  1,  1,  0], [1,  0,  0,  1,  1]]
print(has_path(graph=G,  v_start=3,  v_end=0))


Is there a path between vertices 3 and 0?
A  simple and  eective  way  to  grow  your computer science skills is to master the basics. Knowing the basics sets apart the great coders from the merely intermediate ones.  One such basic area in computer science is graph theorywhich we address in this puzzle.
So rst things rst:  what is a graph?   You already know  data  structures  like  lists,  sets,  and  dictionaries. These data structures are denoted as complex data struc-turesnot  because  they’re  dicult  to  understand  but because they build upon other data structures. A graph is just another complex data structure for relational data.
Relational data consists of edges  and vertices.  Each vertex stands in one or more relations with other ver-tices.   An example  for  relational data  is the  Facebook social graph.  Facebook represents users as vertices and friendship relations as edges.   Two users are connected via an edge in the graph if they are (Facebook) friends.



166	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


How to maintain a graph data structure in the code? The puzzle uses an adjacency matrix as graph data struc-ture G. Each row i in the matrix stores the out-neighbors of vertex i. And each column j stores the in-neighbors of vertex j.  Thus, there is an edge from vertex i to vertex j, if G[i][j]==1.
How to determine whether there is a path between two vertices?
Function find_path(graph,  v_start,  v_end,  path_len) checks  whether  there  is  a  direct  or  indirect  path  be-
tween  two  vertices  v_start  and  v_end  in  graph.   We know that there is a direct path between v_start and v_end if both are already neighborsor, more formally, graph[v_start][v_end]==1.
However, even if there is not a direct path, there could be an indirect path between vertices v_start and v_end. To check this, the algorithm uses a recursive approach. Specically, there is an indirect path if a vertex v_nbor exists such that there is a path v_start ! v_nbor ! ::: ! v_end.
The variable path_len stores the length of the cur-rent path. We increment it in each recursion level as the current path length increases by one. Note that all paths with length  n consist of at least n vertices.  In other words, at least one vertex is visited twice and a cycle ex-ists in this recursion instance.  Hence, we skip recursion



5.45.   GRAPH TRAVERSAL	167


for paths with length greater or equal than the number of vertices in the graph.
This puzzle asks whether there is a path between 3 and 0.  If you understand what the code is doing, it suf-ces to look at the adjacency matrix G. There is a direct path from vertex 3 to vertices 1 and 2 (and to itself). But neither vertex 1 nor 2 has any out-neighbors. Therefore, there is no path from vertex 3 to any other vertex (be-sides vertices 1 and 2).

The correct solution 

False

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 45 26 9

Incorrect -8 -8 -10 -29 -46


Your new Elo rating 



168	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.46	Lexicographical Sorting



Puzzle 46

############################# ##  id  371
##  Puzzle  Elo  1748
##  Correctly  solved  44  % #############################

pairs  =  [(1,  ’one’), (2,  ’two’), (3,  ’three’), (4,  ’four’)]

#  lexicographical  sorting  (ascending) pairs.sort(key=lambda  pair:  pair[1]) print(pairs[0][1])


What is the output of this code?
The high Elo indicates that only experienced Python coders can solve this puzzle.  There are two barriers to overcome.
First, the lambda function seems to be an abstract concept.   Yet,  it  is  only  old  wine  in  a  new  bottle.   A lambda function is nothing but an anonymous function with a special syntax. The variable name(s) between the lambda keyword and the colon (:) dene the function ar-



5.46.   LEXICOGRAPHICAL SORTING	169


guments.  The body after the colon uses the arguments to dene the return value of the function. In the puzzle, we use the lambda function as a key for the sorting func-tion.  The key denes that the list should be sorted by the second value of the tuple, which is a string.
Second, we are not sorting by ascending integers, i.e., 1,  2,  3,  4, but by ascending strings according to their position in the alphabet, i.e., ’four’,  ’one’,  ’three’, and   ’two’.  So the second tuple element from the rst list element is ’four’.

The correct solution 

four

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 45 27 10

Incorrect -8 -8 -10 -28 -45


Your new Elo rating 



170	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.47	Chaining of Set Operations



Puzzle 47

############################# ##  id  399
##  Puzzle  Elo  1749
##  Correctly  solved  40  % #############################

#  popular  instagram  accounts #  (millions  followers)
inst  =  {"@instagram":232, "@selenagomez":133, "@victoriassecret":59, "@cristiano":120, "@beyonce":111, "@nike":76}

#  popular  twitter  accounts #  (millions  followers) twit  =  {"@cristiano":69,
"@barackobama":100, "@ladygaga":77, "@selenagomez":56, "@realdonaldtrump":48}


inst_names  =  set(filter(lambda  key: ,!	inst[key]>60,  inst.keys()))



5.47.   CHAINING OF SET OPERATIONS	171



twit_names  =  set(filter(lambda  key: ,!	twit[key]>60,  twit.keys()))

superstars  =  inst_names.intersection(twit_names) print(list(superstars)[0])


What is the output of this code?
You will use or have already used the concepts in-troduced in this puzzle.  They are elementary pieces of knowledge for any Python programmer. There are three basic concepts in the puzzle.
First,  we have the two dictionaries mapping an ac-count  name  to  the  number  of  followers.   For  example, Cristiano Ronaldo (key:  "@cristiano") has 120 million Instagram followers.  In contrast to lists, dictionaries al-low fast data access. You can retrieve each item with only one operation without having to iterate over the whole data structure. In the words of a computer scientist: the dictionary access has constant runtime complexity.
Second, the lter function returns a new sequence in which each item matches a dened characteristic.   The lter function takes two arguments.  The rst argument is a function that returns a boolean value True or False: True if a sequence element should be included and False otherwise.   The second argument is the sequence to be ltered.



172	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


Third, intersecting sets s1 and s2 returns a new set that contains elements that are in both sets s1 and s2.
The only star that has more than 60 million Insta-gram AND twitter followers is Cristiano Ronaldo.

The correct solution 

@cristiano

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 45 27 10

Incorrect -8 -8 -10 -28 -45


Your new Elo rating 



5.48.   BASIC SET OPERATIONS	173

5.48	Basic Set Operations


Puzzle 48

############################# ##  id  390
##  Puzzle  Elo  1755
##  Correctly  solved  60  % #############################

words_list  =  ["bitcoin", "cryptocurrency", "wallet"]
crawled_text  =  ’’’
Research  produced  by  the  University  of Cambridge  estimates  that  in  2017, there  are  2.9  to  5.8  million  unique users  using  a  cryptocurrency  wallet, most  of  them  using  bitcoin.
’’’

split_text  =  crawled_text.split()
res1  =  True  in  map(lambda  word:  word  in ,!	split_text,  words_list)
res2  =  any(word  in  words_list  for  word  in ,!	split_text)
print(res1  ==  res2)


What is the output of this code?
After executing the code puzzle, both res1 and res2



174	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


store  whether  variable  crawled_text  contains  a  word from the word_list. I explain both ways to achieve this in the following.
res1: The map function checks for each element word in the word_list whether word is an element of the split crawled_text.   The  default  split  function  divides  the string along the whitespaces.   The result is an iterable with  three  booleansone  for  each  word  in  the  list  of words word_list. Finally, we check whether one of them is True.
res2:  The any function checks whether there is an element in the iterable that is True.  As soon as it nds such a True value, this function returns True. Note that it  is  more  ecient  to  use  the  any  function  to  do  this instead of performing a list iteration.  After checking for the rst word ‘bitcoin’, the function already returns True.









The correct solution 



True



5.48.   BASIC SET OPERATIONS	175


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 45 28 10

Incorrect -8 -8 -10 -27 -45


Your new Elo rating 



176	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES

5.49	Simple Unicode Encryption


Puzzle 49

############################# ##  id  391
##  Puzzle  Elo  1763
##  Correctly  solved  66  % #############################

def  encrypt(text):
encrypted  =  map(lambda  c:  chr(ord(c)  +  2), ,!	text)
return  ’’.join(encrypted)


def  decrypt(text):
decrypted  =  map(lambda  c:  chr(ord(c)  -  2), ,!	text)
return  ’’.join(decrypted)


s  =  "xtherussiansarecomingx" print(decrypt(encrypt(encrypt(s)))  == ,!     encrypt(s))


What is the output of this code?
You already know that computers only operate on 0s and 1s.  Every single character in a string is encoded as a sequence of 0s and 1s.  Unicode is one such encoding



5.49.   UNICODE ENCRYPTION	177


that maps a bunch of zeros and ones (a binary ordinal value) to a symbol that you can read (a character). The Unicode table assigns one binary or decimal value to each character. For example, the Unicode value 41 encodes the value ’A’ and the Unicode value 42 the value ’B’.
With  Unicode,  we  create  our  own  secret  language via encryption and decryption functions.  The functions encrypt and decrypt operate on a string literal s1.  To encrypt or decrypt a string, we shift each character by two Unicode positions.  The encrypt function shifts the string to the right, the decrypt function shifts it to the left.
We use the map function to implement this shift for each character in the string s1.  Using the built-in func-tion ord(), shifting a character is as simple as adding a bias value to the Unicode value of the respective charac-ter.
The result of both encryption and decryption is a se-quence type. Hence, we join the sequence with the empty string as a separator to receive the nal encrypted or de-crypted string.
By calling the function encrypt() twice, the string is simply shifted by 2 + 2 = 4 positions in the Unicode table.   Hence,  the result of a double encryption plus a single decryption is the same as a single decryption, i.e., 2 + 2 	2 = 2.



178	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


The correct solution 

True

Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 46 28 10

Incorrect -8 -8 -9 -27 -45


Your new Elo rating 



5.50.   THE GUESS AND CHECK FRAMEWORK  179

5.50	 The Guess and Check Framework


Puzzle 50

############################# ##  id  400
##  Puzzle  Elo  1780
##  Correctly  solved  56  % #############################

import  random


def  guess(a,  b):
return  random.randint(a,  b)


def  check(x,  y): return  y  **  2  ==  x


x  =  100
left,  right  =  0,  x
y  =  guess(left,  right) while  not  check(x,  y):
y  =  guess(left,  right) print(y)


What is the output of this code?



180	CHAPTER 5.   FIFTY PUZZLES


The  method  of  guess  and  check  is  a  good  starting point for designing a new algorithm.   The algorithm is simple, parallelizable to thousands of cores, and well es-tablished in theory.   The runtime of the algorithm can often be analyzed statistically.
The idea is to rst guess (generate) a possible solution and then check whether it is correct (or acceptable). For example, Bitcoin miners guess the solution to a complex problem. If they nd a solution, a new bitcoin is created. When generating the solution, it is common to use ran-domization.  The eciency of the algorithm depends on how informed the guessing is. The better you guess, the more ecient the algorithm becomes.
The  puzzle  nds  an  integer  solution  for  the  square root of an input number x. The guess method generates a random number y between 0 and x. It is not informed. The check method checks whether the number y is the square root.







The correct solution 


10



5.50.   THE GUESS AND CHECK FRAMEWORK  181


Add this to your last Elo rating 


Your Elo 0 - 500 500 - 1000
1000 - 1500 1500 - 2000 >2000

Correct 47 47 46 29 10

Incorrect -8 -8 -9 -26 -45


Your new Elo rating 













6

Final Remarks



Congratulations,  you made it through 50 code puzzles and you have signicantly improved your skills in read-ing and understanding code. By now, you should have a fair estimate of your skill level in comparison to others be sure to check out Table 3.1 again to get the respective rank for your Elo rating.  This book is all about push-ing you from beginner to intermediate coding level.  In follow-up books, we address the advanced level with more dicult puzzles.
Consistent eort and persistence is the key to success. If you feel that solving code puzzles has advanced your skills,  make  it  a  daily  habit  to  solve  a  Python  puzzle and watch the related video that is given on the Finxter web app.  This habit alone will push your coding skills through the roofand provide a comfortable living for


182



183


you  and  your  family  in  a  highly  protable  profession. Build this habit into your lifee.g.,  use your morning coee break routineand you will soon become one of the best programmers in your environment.

Where  to  go  from  here?	I  am  publishing  a  fresh code puzzle every couple of days on our website https:// finxter.com. All puzzles are available for free. My goal with Finxter is to make learning to code more ecient, more individualized to your precise skill level, and more accessiblethat’s why I also post regular puzzles on our Facebook page.  For any feedback, question, or problem you struggle and need help with, please send me an email to info@finxter.com. If you want to grow your Python skills on autopilot, register for the free puzzle newsletter at https://blog.finxter.com/subscribe/.
Finally,  I  would  like  to  express  my  deep  gratitude that you have spent your time solving code puzzles and reading this book.  Above everything else, I value your time. The ultimate goal of any good textbook should be to save, not take, your time.   By working through this textbook,  you  have  gained  insights  about  your  coding skill level and I hope that you have experienced a positive return on invested time and money.   Now,  please keep investing in yourself and stay active within the Finxter community.















More Python Textbooks



This Python workbook extends the "Coee Break Python" textbook series to help you master computer science with a focus on Python coding. The other textbooks are listed in the following:
















184



185


Coee  Break  Python:   50  Workouts  to  Kick-start Your Rapid Code Understanding in Python.
The rst bestselling book of the "Coee Break Python" series oers 50 educative code puzzles, 10 tips for ecient learning, 5 Python cheat sheets, and 1 accurate way to measure your coding skills.



















Get the ebook: https://blog.finxter.com/coffee-break-python/
Get the print book: http://bit.ly/cbpython



186	MORE PYTHON BOOKS


Coee Break Python Workbook:  127 Python Puzzles to Push You From Zero to Hero in Your Coee Breaks
This book is the chess grandmaster way of learning Python.   127  unique  and  brand-new  Python  puzzles  -each pointing to gaps in your knowledge, challenges you to guess a solution, and then explains potential solutions in an easy-to-understand manner.
















Get the ebook:
https://blog.finxter.com/coffee-break-python-workbook/
Get the print book: http://bit.ly/cbpythonwork



187


Coee Break NumPy:  A Simple Road to Data Science Mastery That Fits Into Your Busy Life.
Coee Break NumPy is a new step-by-step system to teach you how to learn Python’s library for data science faster, smarter, and better.   You simply solve practical Python NumPy puzzles as you enjoy your morning coee.


Coffee Break
NumPy







A Simple Road to Data Science Mastery That Fits Into Your Busy Life
MAYER, RIAZ, RIEGER


Get the ebook: https://blog.finxter.com/coffee-break-numpy/
Get the print book: http://bit.ly/cbnumpy



188	MORE PYTHON BOOKS


Coee Break Python Slicing:  24 Workouts to Master Slicing in Python, Once and for All.
Coee Break Python Slicing is all about growing your Python expertiseone coee at a time.   The focus lies on the important slicing technique to access consecutive data ranges. Understanding slicing thoroughly is crucial for your success as a Python developer.
As  a  bonus,  you  will  track  your  individual  Python coding skill level throughout the book.


Coﬀee Break Python Slicing








Workouts to Master Slicing in Python, Once and for All
24



Get the ebook: https://blog.finxter.com/coffee-break-python/
Get the print book: http://bit.ly/cbpslicing
